[PAGE 6]

This "Catan Almanac" contains detailed, alphabetical entries and examples for Catan. These are not the "Game Rules." You do not have to read this material prior to your first game. Instead, use the Game Rules. Then read this to enjoy the complete experience.
This almanac includes advanced rules and clarifications. You can also refer to it if any questions arise during a game.

{Build (Building)}
You may build on your turn after you have rolled for resource production and finished trading. To build, you must turn in the specified combinations of resource cards (see the Building Costs Cards). Return the resource cards to the supply stacks. 
You can build as many items and buy as many cards as you desire—as long as you have enough resources to "pay" for them and they are still available in the supply. (See Settlements, Cities, Roads, and Development Cards.)
Each player has a supply of 15 roads, 5 settlements, and 4 cities. If you build a city, return the settlement to your supply. Roads and cities, however, remain on the board until the end of the game once they are built.
Your turn is over after "building," and the player to your left continues the game.
New rule variant: see Combined Trade/Build Phase.

{Building Costs Cards}
The building costs cards show what can be built and which resources are required. When you pay building costs, you must return the necessary resources to their supply stacks. You can build settlements and roads, upgrade settlements to cities, and buy development cards.

{Cities}
You cannot build a city directly. You can only upgrade an existing settlement to a city. You pay the required resources, return the settlement to your supply, and replace the settlement with a city on the same intersection. Each city is worth 2 victory points. You receive double resource production (2 resource cards) from the adjacent terrain hexes whenever those numbers are rolled.
When you build a city, the upgraded settlement piece becomes available again. You can use it to build another settlement later.
Hint: It is extremely difficult to win the game without upgrading settlements to cities. Since you only have 5 settlements available, you can only reach 5 victory points by only building settlements.

{Coast}
When a terrain hex borders on the sea (i.e., a frame piece), it is called a "coast." You can build a road along a coast. You can build settlements and upgrade settlements to cities on intersections that border on the sea. However, since a site on the coast borders only 1 or 2 terrain hexes, coastal settlements generate smaller resource yields. Still, coastal sites often lie on harbors, which allow you to use maritime trade to trade resources at more favorable rates.

{Combined Trade/Build Phase}
The separation of the trade and build phases was introduced to make the sequence easier to learn for beginners. We recommend experienced players ignore this separation.
After rolling for resource production, you can trade and build in any order (you can trade, build, trade again and build again, etc.). You can even use a harbor on the same turn you build a settlement there. Using this method speeds up the game a lot.

[PAGE 7]

{Desert}
The desert is the only terrain hex that does not produce resources. The robber starts the game there. A settlement or a city built adjacent to the desert yields fewer resources than those built next to one of the other terrain types.

{Development Cards}
There are 3 different kinds of development cards: Knight Cards, Progress Cards, and Victory Point Cards.
When you buy a development card, take the top card of the draw pile into your hand. Keep your development cards hidden until you play them. This keeps the other players in the dark.
You cannot trade or give away development cards.
You may only play 1 development card during your turn—either 1 knight card or 1 progress card. You can play the card at any time, even before you roll the dice. You may not, however, play a card that you bought during the same turn.
Exception: If you buy a card and it is a victory point card that brings you to 10 points, you may immediately reveal this card (and all other VP cards) and win the game.
You only reveal victory point cards when the game is over—once you or an opponent reaches 10+ victory points and declares victory.

{Distance Rule}
You may only build a settlement on an unoccupied intersection and only if none of the 3 adjacent intersections contains a settlement or city.

{Domestic Trade}
On your turn, you may trade resources with the other players (after rolling for resource production). You and the other players negotiate the terms of your trades—such as which cards will be exchanged. You may trade as many times as you can, using single or multiple cards. However, you cannot give away cards, or trade matching resources ("trade" 3 ore for 1 ore, for example).
Important: While it is your turn, you must be a part of all trades, and the other players may not trade among themselves.

{Ending the Game}
If you have—or reach—10 victory points on your turn, the game ends immediately and you win! You can only win during your turn. If somehow you find you have 10 victory points during another player’s turn, you must wait until your next turn to claim victory.

[PAGE 8]

{Game Play}
Here is a summary of the the game sequence, plus some 
more specific entries where you can find details: (1) Lay out the game board: Set-up, Variable (2) Initial set-up: Set-up Phase (3) Play
The starting player begins the game. The other players follow in clockwise order.
On your turn, you complete these 3 phases in order: Roll for Resource Production (the roll applies to all players), Trade, and Build
You may play 1 development card any time during your turn.
Pass the dice to the player on your left at the end of your turn. That player then takes their turn using the same 3 phases.

{Harbors}
Harbors allow you to trade resources more favorably. In order to control a harbor, you must build a settlement on a coastal intersection which borders the harbor. See also "Maritime Trade".

{Intersections}
Intersections are the points where 3 hexes meet. You may only build settlements on intersections. The influence (for resource yields) of settlements and cities extends into the 3 adjacent terrain hexes that form the intersection.

{Knight Cards}
When you play a "Knight" development card during your turn, you must immediately move the robber. Place the knight card face up in front of you.
You must move the robber away from its current spot and onto the number token of any other terrain hex or on the desert.
You then steal 1 resource card from a player who has a settlement or a city adjacent to the robber. If there are 2 or more such players, you may choose your victim.
The player you elect to rob keeps their cards face down while you take 1 of their cards at random. If that player has no cards, you get nothing! (However, you can always ask players about the number of cards they hold. They must answer truthfully.)
If you are the first player to have 3 knight cards face up in front of you, you take the "Largest Army" special card. This special card is worth 2 victory points.
If another player has more face-up knight cards than you, they take the special card and the 2 victory points that go with it.

{Largest Army}
If you are the first player to play 3 knight cards, you receive this special card, which is worth 2 victory points. You place the "Largest Army" card face up in front of you. If another player plays more knight cards than you have, they immediately take the special card. The 2 victory points likewise count for the new owner.

[PAGE 9]

{Longest Road}
If you are the first player to build a continuous road of at least 5 individual road pieces, you take this special card and place it face up in front of you. This card is worth 2 victory points.
Note: If your road network branches, you may only count the single longest branch for purposes of the longest road.
If you hold the "Longest Road" card and another player builds a longer road, they immediately take your "Longest Road" card. They also acquire the 2 bonus victory points. (Since you also lose the 2 victory points, it is a 4 point swing!)


You can break an opponent’s road by building a settlement on an unoccupied intersection along that road!
Special Case: If your longest road is broken and you are tied for longest road, you still keep the "Longest Road" card. However, if you no longer have the longest road, but two or more players tie for the new longest road, set the "Longest Road" card aside. Do the same if no one has a 5+ segment road. The "Longest Road" card comes into play again when only 1 player has the longest road (of at least 5 road pieces).

{Maritime Trade}
On your turn, you can trade resources using maritime trade during the trade phase even without involving another player.
The most basic (and unfavorable) exchange rate is 4:1. You may trade 4 identical resource cards to the supply in exchange for 1 resource card of your choice. You do not need a harbor (settlement at a harbor location) to trade at 4:1, so when nobody wants to trade...

If you have built a settlement or city at a harbor location, you can trade more effectively. There are 2 different kinds of harbor locations:
Generic Harbor (3:1): Here you may exchange 3 identical resource cards for any 1 other resource card during your trade phase.
Special Harbor (2:1): There is only 1 special harbor for each type of resource (with the same symbol). So, if you earn plenty of a certain type of resource, it can be useful to build on the special harbor for that resource type. The exchange rate of 2:1 only applies to the resource shown on the harbor location. A special harbor does not permit you to trade any other resource type at a more favorable rate (not even 3:1)!

[PAGE 10]

{Number Tokens}
The 18 number tokens are marked with the numerals "2" through "12." There is only one "2" and one "12." There is no "7."
The more often a number is rolled, the more often each associated hex produces resources. Note the size of the numbers and the dots (pips) beneath the numbers on the tokens. The taller the number and the larger the quantity of dots, the more likely it is that number will be rolled. "6" and "8" (the red numbers) are the most frequently rolled numbers. They each have 5 dots, because there are 5 ways to roll these numbers on the 2 dice.
The letters on the back of the number tokens are only used during the setup phase (see Set-up, Variable).

{Paths}
Paths are defined as the edges where 2 hexes and/or hexes and the frame meet. Paths run along the border of 2 terrain hexes or between a land hex and the frame. Only one road can be built on any path. At each end of a path is an intersection.

{Progress Cards}
Progress cards are a type of development card. They have green frames. There are 2 each of 3 varieties:
Road Building: If you play this card, you may immediately place 2 free roads on the board (according to normal building rules).
Year of Plenty: If you play this card you may immediately take any 2 resource cards from the supply stacks. You may use these cards to build in the same turn.
Monopoly: If you play this card, you must name 1 type of resource. All the other players must give you all of the resource cards of this type that they have in their hands. If an opponent does not have a resource card of the specified type, they do not have to give you anything.
You may play only 1 development card during your turn.

{Resource Cards (Resources)}
There are 5 different types of resources (see page 3): grain (from fields), brick (from hills), ore (from mountains), lumber (from forest), and wool (from pasture). These resources are represented by "resource cards." You receive these cards as income from the resource production of these hexes. Resource production is determined by the dice roll at the beginning of each turn. You receive your income for each terrain hex adjacent to your settlements or cities every time the production number on the hex is rolled (exception: see Robber).

{Resource Production}
On your turn, you must roll the dice for the turn’s resource production. The number rolled determines which hexes produce resources. Each number appears twice—except for "2" and "12," which only appear once.
All players who have settlements or cities on the hexes indicated by the roll receive the yields (resource cards) of those hexes. Each settlement produces 1 resource card and each city produces 2 resource cards.
It is possible that during the game there will not be enough resources in the bank to supply all of the yields. If there are not enough resource cards to give every player all the production they earn, then no player receives any of that resource that turn.
Exception: If the shortage of resource cards only affects a single player, give that player as many of these resources as are left in the supply, and any extras are lost. In either case, production of other types of resources is not affected.

[PAGE 11]

{Resource Trade}
In the second phase of your turn, you may trade with the other players. The other players may not trade among themselves, only with the player whose turn it is. There are 2 different kinds of trade: Domestic trade and Maritime trade.

{Roads}
The roads connect your settlements and cities. You build roads on paths. You cannot build new settlements without also building roads. Roads provide victory points only if you hold the Longest Road special card. Only 1 road may be built on each path. You can build roads along the coast.

{Robber}
The robber begins the game in the desert. It is moved only by rolling a "7" or playing a Knight card.
If the robber is moved to any other terrain hex, it prevents that hex from producing resources. Players with settlements and/or cities adjacent to the target terrain hex receive no resources from this hex as long as the robber is in the hex.

{Rolling a "7" and Activating the Robber}
If you roll a "7" for resource production, none of the players receive resources. Instead:
(1) Each player counts their resource cards. Any player with more than 7 resource cards (i.e., 8 or more) must choose and discard half of them. Return discards to the supply stacks. If you hold an odd number of cards, round down (e.g., if you have 9 resource cards, you discard 4).
(2) Then you (the player who rolled the "7") must move the robber to the number token of any other terrain hex (or to the desert hex). This blocks the resource production of this hex, until the robber moves to another number token or the desert.
(3) After discarding occurs, you also steal 1 resource card at random from a player who has a settlement or city adjacent to this new hex. If there are 2 or more players with buildings there, you may choose from which one to steal. 
The robber must be moved. You may not choose to leave the robber on the same hex.
After moving the robber, your turn continues with the trade phase.
See also Knights.

{Settlements}
A settlement is worth 1 victory point. Settlements are built on intersections (where 3 hexes meet or 1 or 2 hexes meet the frame). You share in all of the resource production of each terrain hex adjacent to your settlements. You must meet 2 conditions when building a settlement:
(1) Your settlement must always connect to 1 or more of your own roads.
(2) You must observe the Distance Rule. For an example of the distance rule, see Illustration M on page 12.

[PAGE 12]
Note: If you have built all 5 of your settlements, you must upgrade 1 of your settlements to a city before you can build another settlement. You will then have the settlement in your supply, so you can build another settlement.

{Set-Up Phase}
Begin the "set-up phase" after you build the game map.
Everyone chooses a color and takes the corresponding game pieces:
5 settlements;
4 cities;
15 roads; and
1 building costs card.
Sort the resource cards into 5 stacks and place them face up beside the board.
Shuffle the development cards and place them face down beside the resource cards.
Place the 2 special cards and the dice beside the board.
Place the robber in the desert.
The set-up phase has 2 rounds. Each player builds 1 road and 1 settlement per round.

{Round One}
Each player rolls both dice. The player who rolls highest is the starting player and begins.
The starting player places a settlement on an unoccupied intersection of their choice, then places a road adjacent to this settlement.
The other players then follow clockwise.
Everyone places 1 settlement and 1 adjoining road.
Important: When placing all other settlements, the Distance Rule (see page 7) always applies!

{Round Two}
Once all players have built their first settlement, the player who went last in the first round begins round two. That player builds their second settlement and its adjacent road.
Important: After the starting player builds, the other players follow counterclockwise, so the starting player in round one places their second settlement last.
The second settlement can be placed on any unoccupied intersection, as long as the Distance Rule is observed. It doesn’t have to connect to the first settlement. The second road must attach to the second settlement (pointing in any of the 3 directions).
Each player receives their starting resources immediately after building their second settlement. For each terrain hex adjacent to this second settlement, take a corresponding resource card from the supply.
Note: The starting player (the last to place their second settlement) begins the game: That player rolls both dice for resource production. You can find helpful tips about the set-up phase under "Tactics."

{Set-Up, Variable}
Assemble the frame as outlined on pages 2-3.
Note: If you want to vary relative harbor locations slightly, just shuffle the order of the frame pieces and do not place the random harbor pieces as outlined below in point 2.
Turn the terrain hexes face down. Shuffle the terrain hexes.
1. Randomly place the terrain tiles face up inside the frame 

[PAGE 13]

2. Now take the 9 harbor pieces (the small 5-sided pieces with ships on them) and randomly place one on top of each harbor on the frame. 
3. Place the 18 number tokens as shown:
Sort the number tokens beside the board, letter side face up.
Place 1 token on 
each land hex. Start at a corner of the island. Place the number tokens on the terrain hexes in alphabetical order, proceeding counter-clockwise toward the center. Skip the desert.
Important: Alternatively, you can use a fully random set-up. Place 1 token on each land hex. Start at one corner of the island, and place the number tokens in random order. In such case, the tokens with the red numbers must not be next to each other. You may have to swap tokens to ensure that no red numbers are on adjacent hexes.
Note: The desert never gets a number token. It should be skipped.
More set-up instructions can be found in "Set-up Phase."

{Soldier Cards}
Some earlier editions of Catan had soldier cards. These are now called knight cards. See Knight Cards.

{Starting Set-Up for Beginners}
If you want to use the starting set-up, lay out the board as shown in Illustration R (and the Game Overview):
Assemble the frame exactly as shown in Illustration R.
Place the terrain hexes exactly as shown in Illustration R.
Place 2 settlements and 2 roads of each color as shown.
If only 3 are playing, remove the red pieces.
Each player receives the 3 resources from the terrain hexes adjacent to their settlement marked by the white star.
The oldest player is the starting player. The oldest player takes the first turn and rolls for resource production.

{Tactics}
Since you play Catan with a variable map, the tactical considerations of each game are different. There are, nevertheless, some common points you should consider:
Brick and lumber are the most important resources at the beginning of the game. You need both to build roads and settlements. You should try to place at least 1 of your first settlements on a good forest or hills hex.
Do not underestimate the value of harbors. For instance, a player with settlements or cities on productive fields should try to build a settlement on the "grain" harbor.
Leave enough room to expand when placing your first 2 settlements. Look at your opponents’ sites and roads before making a placement. Beware of getting surrounded! If you plan to build toward a harbor, the middle of the island may be a tricky place for a starting settlement, for it can easily be cut off from the coast.
The more you trade, the better your chances of victory. 
Even if it is not your turn, you should offer trades to the current player!

[PAGE 14]

{Trade}
After you roll for resource production, you may trade with other players (domestic trade) or with the bank (maritime trade).
You may trade as long as you have resource cards.
If you decide not to trade during your turn, no one can trade.
You may trade with another player between your turns, but only if it is that player’s turn and they elect to trade with you.
You may not trade with the bank during another player’s turn.
You may not give away cards.
You may not trade development cards.
You may not trade like resources (e.g., 2 wool for 1 wool).

{Victory Point Cards}
Victory point cards are development cards, so they can be "bought." These orange framed development cards represent important cultural achievements, represented by certain buildings.
Each victory point card is worth 1 victory point. You only reveal your victory point cards when you or someone else wins the game! Keep victory point cards hidden until you have 10 points during your turn and you can declare victory. (You should also reveal them if someone else wins.)
Hint: Again, keep your victory point cards hidden until the end of the game. Place them face down in front of you. Of course, if you have 1 or 2 unused cards face down in front of you for a long time, the other players will assume that they are victory point cards.

{Victory Points}
The first player to reach (be at) 10 victory points (VPs) on their turn wins the game.
Players acquire victory points (VPs) for the following:
1 settlement = 1 VP
1 city = 2 VPs
Longest Road special card = 2 VPs
Largest Army special card = 2 VPs
Victory point (VP) card = 1 VP
Since each player begins with 2 settlements, each player begins the game with 2 victory points.
Therefore, you only need 8 more victory points to win the game!
Hint: In Catan, you will often see an icon of a rising sun (on VP cards and special VP cards, etc.). This is the VP symbol. It is a visual reminder for the things, other than settlements and cities, that earn you VPs. Each VP symbol you see is worth 1 VP.

A general note on Catan rules. This is the 5th English-language edition of Catan (aka Settlers of Catan). Over the years, the rules have been clarified, refined, and occasionally updated. As of January 1, 2015, all of the rules in this version of Catan take precedence over any previously-published rules.