THE LAW OF
Table of Contents
1. Golden Rules 2 13. Corvid Conspiracy 14
2. Key Concepts 3 14. Lord of the Hundreds 14
3. Victory 3 15. Keepers in Iron 16
4. Key Actions 4 Appendix A. Advanced Setup 17
5. Setup 4 Appendix B. Components 18
6. Marquise de Cat 5 Appendix C. Variant Maps 19
7. Eyrie Dynasties 6 Appendix D. Vagabonds 20
8. Woodland Alliance 7 Appendix E. Hirelings 20
9. Vagabond 8 Appendix F. Landmarks 21
10. Lizard Cult 10 Appendix G. Glossary 21
11. Riverfolk Company 11 Index 22
12. Underground Duchy 12
(September 5, 2024)
1

Reading the Law
Text in small capitals defines key terms.
Text in italics gives reminders and clarifi-
cations. Faction icons mark rules modified
by Faction Rules and Abilities sections.
Root contains two rulebooks: the Learning to Play guide
and this book, the Law. If you like a conversational
teaching style and many graphical examples, read the
Learning to Play guide. If you like a strictly defined,
formal rules in a concise reference style, read the Law.
These rules of thumb will help you interpret the Law.
Q1. I’d like to do something, and the rules don’t say
that I can’t do it. Can I do it?
A1. Within the confines of the action, yes! The game will often
surprise you with outlandish, unexpected situations, and that’s
part of the fun, but this doesn’t mean you can flip the table.
Q2. Can another player not consent to an action?
A2. No actions require consent. Just do the thing.
Q3. It seems like something should happen, but the
rule doesn’t tell me to do that thing. What do I do?
A3. Follow the literal word of the Law, not your instinct, even
if a similar rule exists.
Q4. A rule uses a specific term or action. Does it also
include another, closely related term or action?
A4. Nope! Assume we mean only the original term and not any
related terms. For example, the terms move and place are dif-
ferent, which is important in rules such as The Keep (6.2.2).
If you have any other questions, check our website for
more answers: ledergames.com/root
If you have any missing or damaged components, you
can go here for support: ledergames.com/replacements
1. Golden Rules
This chapter gives answers to technical, detailed ques-
tions. You do not need to read it when first learning.
1.1 Rules Conflicts
1.1.1 Precedence. If a card conflicts with the Law, follow
the card. If the Learning to Play guide conflicts with
the Law, follow the Law. If you can follow both a gen-
eral rule and a faction or hireling rule, follow both; if
you cannot, follow the faction or hireling rule.
1.1.2 Use of Cannot. The term cannot is absolute. It
cannot be overridden unless explicitly instructed.
1.1.3 Unclear Resolutions and Choices. Whenever it is
unclear what order simultaneous effects should re-
solve in, or which player should make a decision,
the player taking their turn chooses.
2

1.2 Public and Private Information
1.2.1 Hands. Players may only show or reveal cards in
their hand if explicitly instructed, but the number
of cards in their hand is public information. O
1.2.2 Discard. The discard pile can be searched and in-
spected at any time.
1.3 Negotiation and Deals
1.3.1 Agreements. Players may discuss the game and
make agreements, but they are non-binding.
1.3.2 Cards. Players may only give cards to each other
if explicitly instructed.
1.4 Game Structure
1.4.1 Turn Structure. Each player’s turn has three
phases: Birdsong, Daylight, and Evening. Any-
thing that says “at start of” a phase happens be-
fore everything else in the phase, and anything
that says “at end of” happens after everything else
in the phase but before the start of the next phase,
if any. After a player ends Evening, the next clock-
wise player begins their turn. Play continues until
one player has won the game (3.1).
1.4.2 Interrupts. You cannot interrupt an action (in-
cluding a compound action such as the Marquise’s
March), ability (such as the Corvids’ Exposure), or
persistent effect (such as the Eyrie Emigre card) with
another effect unless it explicitly allows it. (For ex-
ample, the Armorers card says it is used “In battle...”).
1.5 Pieces
1.5.1 Limits. Pieces are limited by the contents of the
game. Do not use proxy pieces if you run out.
1.5.2 Starting Faction. Each player owns the faction
they choose in setup (5) and the pieces listed on
the back of its faction board except for items. Ge-
nerically, these are called faction pieces or sim-
ilar. Specifically, these are called [faction name]
pieces. (For example, “your faction warriors” and
“warriors of your faction” and “Marquise warriors” all
refer to the orange wooden cat-shaped warriors.)
1.5.3 Piece Ownership. The ownership of faction piec-
es cannot change. (For example, the Marquise can-
not use Field Hospitals on Riverfolk mercenaries or
hirelings, since these are not Marquise warriors.)
1.5.4 Piece Manipulation. Pieces are placed and re-
moved as defined in the Glossary (G.1.19, G.1.22).
If you are prompted to place, take, or remove piec-
es but you cannot do so fully, you must place, take,
or remove the maximum number possible. (This
does not let you avoid costs or prerequisites. You just can-
not do less than the most you can.) If multiple pieces
are removed simultaneously and that would trigger
effects, remove all pieces before triggering effects.
1.5.5 Use of Force. Some effects let you force a play-
er or their pieces to act. Resolve this exactly as if
that player were choosing to do this, as limited by
the effect. (For example, if you force the Eyrie to move
warriors, they benefit from Lords of the Forest.)

2.5 Rule
2. Key Concepts
A player rules a clearing if they have more total war-
Terms are defined strictly in the Glossary (Appendix G). riors and buildings in it than each other player. (Tokens
and pawns do not contribute to rule.) If there is a tie be-
2.1 Cards tween players in a clearing, no one rules it. EVL
You draw cards from the top of the shared deck, and
discard to a shared discard pile. If the deck is ever emp- 3. Victory
ty, shuffle the discard pile immediately to form a new
deck. Each card has a suit: bird, fox, rabbit, or mouse. 3.1 How to Win
Most cards also have an effect you can craft (4.1). L
The first player to reach 30 victory points immediate-
2.1.1 Birds Are Wild. You can treat any bird card as a ly wins the game. If multiple players reach 30 or more
card of another suit, even if you must spend, take, victory points simultaneously, the player taking the cur-
or give multiple cards of the same suit. L rent turn wins.
I Forced Effects. If you are prompted to discard 3.2 Scoring Victory Points
or give cards of non-bird suits, you must treat
your bird cards as a prompted suit. Each faction has a unique way to score victory points,
but any faction can score victory points as follows.
II Reverse Substitution. If you are prompted to
spend, discard, take, or give a bird card, you 3.2.1 Removing Buildings and Tokens. Whenever you
cannot substitute a card of another suit. remove an enemy’s building or token, you score
one victory point.
2.1.2 Ambush Cards. There are five ambush cards: one
mouse, one rabbit, one fox, and two birds. You 3.2.2 Crafting Items. Whenever you craft an item (4.1),
may spend an ambush card for its suit, but it does score the victory points listed on the card. EH
not have a crafted effect. You may also play one in
3.3 Dominance Cards
battle to deal hits (4.3.1).
The deck has four dominance cards, which let you win
2.1.3 Dominance Cards. There are four dominance
the game without scoring 30 victory points.
cards matching the four suits. You may spend a
dominance card for its suit, but it cannot be craft- 3.3.1 Activating. During your Daylight, if you have at
ed. You may also play one to permanently change least 10 victory points, you may activate a domi-
your victory condition (3.3). nance card in your hand by placing it in your play
area. Remove your score marker from the score
2.2 Clearings and Paths track. You can no longer score victory points. V
The map of the Woodland is composed of many clear- I Mouse, Rabbit, or Fox Dominance. You win
ings linked by paths. the game immediately if you rule three clear-
2.2.1 Adjacency. A clearing is adjacent to all other clear- ings of the suit matching the activated domi-
ings linked to it by a path. D nance card at the start of your Birdsong.
2.2.2 Suit. Each clearing has a suit: mouse, rabbit, or fox. II Bird Dominance. You win the game immedi-
ately if you rule two clearings in opposite cor-
2.2.3 Slots. Each clearing has a number of building
ners at the start of your Birdsong.
slots (white boxes). Whenever you place a build-
ing, it fills an open slot. You cannot place a build- 3.3.2 Activated Cards. An activated dominance card
ing in a clearing with no open slots. does not count against your hand limit, and it
cannot be removed from play. You cannot replace
2.2.4 Ruins. Slots marked with a small “R” begin the
an activated dominance card with a different one.
game filled with ruins. Ruins cannot be removed
unless explicitly instructed (such as by the Vaga- 3.3.3 Using Dominance Cards. A dominance card can be
bond’s Explore action, 9.5.3). spent for its suit. Anytime a dominance card would
be placed in the discard pile, instead place it near
2.3 Rivers the map to show it is available to be taken. L
Many clearings are linked by rivers. (Rivers are not 3.3.4 Taking Available Cards. During your Daylight,
paths, but can be treated as paths if explicitly instructed. Riv-
you can take an available dominance card into
ers do not divide clearings or forests.) O
your hand by spending a card of matching suit.
2.4 Forests You cannot treat an available bird dominance
card as a non-bird suit.
Areas on the map enclosed by printed paths and clear-
ings are called forests.
2.4.1 Adjacency. A forest is adjacent to all clearings that
touch it without crossing a printed path, and it is
adjacent to all forests that are separated by only
one printed path.
3

I Foil Ambush. The attacker may also play an
4. Key Actions ambush card matching the clearing of the bat-
tle. If they do, the defender discards their am-
4.1 Craft bush card and skips 4.3.1.II.
You can craft most cards from your hand to gain an II Resolve Ambush. The defender deals two hits
immediate or persistent effect. immediately (4.3.4). Then, the defender dis-
4.1.1 Cost. To craft a card, you must activate crafting cards the ambush card. If no attacking warriors
pieces of the suits listed in the card’s bottom-left or pawns remain, end the battle immediately.
corner. (A faction’s crafting piece is listed in its Craft- 4.3.2 Step 2: Roll Dice. Roll both dice. The attacker
ing section.) A crafting piece’s suit matches its will deal hits equal to the higher roll, and the de-
clearing. Each crafting piece may be activated fender will deal hits equal to the lower roll. If the
only once per turn. A three-color question mark rolls are equal, attacker and defender will deal the
denotes a crafting piece of any suit. VOL same number of hits. (The use of “will” here reflects
4.1.2 Immediate Effects. When you craft an immediate that hits are not dealt until step 4.) A
effect (paper box), resolve its effect and then dis- I Maximum Rolled Hits. The maximum hits
card the card. If it shows an item, take the match- you can deal from rolling equals the number of
ing item from the item supply on the map and your warriors in the clearing of battle, whether
place it in the Crafted Items box on your faction you are the attacker or defender. V
board. If the card lists an item not in the item sup-
4.3.3 Step 3: Use Effects. The attacker and defender
ply, the card cannot be crafted. EVH may use optional effects (such as the Brutal Tactics
4.1.3 Persistent Effects. When you craft a persistent ef- card) that affect battle. If both want to use effects,
fect (stone box), place it in your play area. You may the attacker chooses who uses them first (1.1.3).
use the effect described on the card.
I Extra Hits. Many effects will deal extra hits,
4.1.4 No Duplicates. You cannot craft a persistent ef- which are not limited by the number of war-
fect if you have an identical one in your play area. riors in the clearing of battle.
4.2 Move II Defenseless. If the defender has no warriors in
the clearing of battle, the attacker will deal an
When you move, take any number (more than zero) of extra hit. V
your warriors and pawns from one clearing and move
them on a linking path (2.2) to one adjacent clearing. 4.3.4 Step 4: Deal Hits. Each hit that a side deals re-
moves one piece of the other side from the clearing
4.2.1 You Must Rule. To take a move, you must rule of battle. (You score one victory point per enemy build-
the origin clearing, destination clearing, or both.
ing or token removed.) The side taking hits chooses
VOC
the order in which their own pieces are removed,
4.2.2 No Movement Limits. A given piece can be but all of their warriors there must be removed be-
moved any number of times per turn. If you are fore any of their buildings or tokens there can be
prompted to take multiple moves, you may move removed; they also choose the order of any effects
the same or separate groups of warriors. triggered by their pieces being removed.
4.3 Battle
5. Setup
When you battle, choose a clearing with any number
of your warriors and pawns as the clearing of battle. If any players are new to the game, use the Standard
You are the attacker. Choose an enemy in the clearing Setup (5.1) If everyone has played and you want more
of battle to be the defender. variety, use the Advanced Setup (Appendix A). If you
want to play with five or more factions that would start
4.3.1 Step 1: Defender May Ambush. The defender
in corner clearings, you must use the Advanced Setup.
may play one ambush card matching the clearing
of battle. If so, resolve 4.3.1.I–II in order. 5.1 Standard Setup
5.1.1 Step 1: Assign Factions and Starting Player.
Assign one faction to each player in any way.
Determine the starting player and seating order
randomly. Each player takes their chosen faction
board and the pieces listed on its back.
5.1.2 Step 2: Place Score Markers. Each player places
their score marker on “0” on the score track.
5.1.3 Step 3: Draw Starting Hands. If you are play-
ing with two players, remove all four dominance
cards from the deck. Shuffle the deck. Each player
draws three cards.
5.1.4 Step 4: Place Ruins. Place a ruin in each slot on
4
the map marked with an “R” (four in total).

5.1.5 Step 5: Form Item Supply. Place these items on
the matching spaces of the item supply near the
top of the map: 2 M, 2 B, 1 C, 1 H, 2 S, 2 T, 2 X.
5.1.6 Step 6: Gather Other Pieces. Hand out the 16
faction overview cards as desired, and place the
two dice near the map.
5.1.7 Step 7: Set Up Factions. In setup order (A, B, C,
etc.), each player follows their faction’s setup in-
structions, listed in their rules section and on the
back of their faction board.
5.2 Reach
To set up an interesting game, choose factions whose
Reach values add up to at least the total reach recom-
mended for your player count. (Adventurous players are
welcome to use any faction mix with 17+ Reach.)
Viable Reach Sums
Players 2 3 4 5 6
Total Reach 17+ 18+ 21+ 25+ 28+
Reach Values
Marquise de Cat 10
Lord of the Hundreds 9
Keepers in Iron 8
Underground Duchy 8
Eyrie Dynasties 7
Vagabond (first/second) 5/2
Riverfolk Company 5
Woodland Alliance 3
Corvid Conspiracy 3
Lizard Cult 2
M
6. Marquise de Cat
6.1 Overview
The Marquise de Cat occupies the Woodland and wants
to turn it into an industrial and military powerhouse.
Each time the Marquise builds one of her buildings—a
workshop, sawmill, or recruiter—she scores victory
points. The more of the same building she has on the
map, the more points she scores. However, to fuel on-
going construction, the Marquise must maintain and
protect a strong, interconnected economy of wood.
6.2 Faction Rules and Abilities
6.2.1 Crafting. The Marquise crafts during Daylight by
activating workshops.
6.2.2 The Keep. The Marquise can place pieces in the
clearing with the keep token, and other players
cannot. (Pieces may be moved into it. If the keep is
removed, there is no way to place it on the map again.)
6.2.3 Field Hospitals. Whenever any number of Mar-
quise warriors are removed from a clearing, the
Marquise may spend a card matching that clear-
ing to place those warriors in the clearing with
the keep token instead of the Marquise’s supply.

6.3 Faction Setup
6.3.1 Step 1: Gather Warriors and Wood. Form sup-
plies of 25 warriors and 8 wood tokens.
6.3.2 Step 2: Place Keep. Place the keep token in any
corner clearing. This is your starting clearing.
6.3.3 Step 3: Garrison. Place a warrior in each clearing
except the clearing in the diagonally opposite cor-
ner from the clearing with the keep token.
6.3.4 Step 4: Place Starting Buildings. Place 1 saw-
mill, 1 workshop, and 1 recruiter. You may place
them among the clearing with the keep token and
any adjacent clearings, in any combination.
6.3.5 Step 5: Fill Buildings Tracks. Place your re-
maining 5 sawmills, 5 workshops, and 5 recruit-
ers on your matching Buildings tracks from right
to left. (Leave the leftmost space of each track empty.)
6.4 Birdsong
Place wood tokens in each clearing with any number of
sawmills, one wood per sawmill there.
6.5 Daylight
First, you may activate workshops to craft cards from
your hand. Then, you may take up to three actions—
plus one action per bird card you spend (not as part of
an action)—in any order and number.
6.5.1 Battle. Initiate a battle.
6.5.2 March. Take up to two moves.
6.5.3 Recruit. Place one warrior at each recruiter. You
may take this action only once per turn.
6.5.4 Build. Place a building.
I Choose Clearing and Building. Choose a
clearing you rule. Choose whether you want
to place a sawmill, workshop, or recruiter. You
will place the leftmost building of its type from
your faction board. You must be able to pay its
cost (6.5.4.II) and place it (6.5.4.III).
II Pay Cost. Find the chosen building’s cost at
the top of its column. Remove wood tokens
equal in number to the cost from the chosen
clearing, any adjacent clearings you rule, or any
clearings connected to the chosen clearing you
rule through any number of clearings you rule.
III Place Building and Score. Place the chosen
building in the chosen clearing, and score the
victory points listed on the space uncovered on
your faction board.
6.5.5 Overwork. Spend a card matching the clearing of
a sawmill, and place a wood token there.
6.6 Evening
Draw one card, plus one card per uncovered draw bo-
nus. Then, if you have more than five cards in your
hand, discard cards of your choice until you have five.
5

E
7. Eyrie Dynasties
7.1 Overview
The Eyrie Dynasties wish to restore their once-
dignified kind to their former glory in the Woodland
by retaking control of the forest clearings. During
their Evening, the Eyrie score victory points based on
the number of roosts on the map. The greater their
presence in the Woodland, the greater their gains.
However, the Eyrie are bound by their Decree, an ev-
er-increasing set of mandated actions promised by their
leader. Each turn, they must take all of the actions on
their Decree, or else fall into turmoil.
7.2 Faction Rules and Abilities
7.2.1 Crafting. The Eyrie craft before resolving the De-
cree during Daylight by activating roosts.
7.2.2 Lords of the Forest. The Eyrie rule a clearing
when tied for most combined warriors and
buildings there, and they have at least one Eyrie
piece there. L
7.2.3 Disdain for Trade. Whenever the Eyrie craft an
item, they ignore the listed victory points and in-
stead score only one victory point. (They can still
score extra crafting points from effects such as Master
Engravers and the Legendary Forge.)
7.3 Faction Setup
7.3.1 Step 1: Gather Warriors. Form a supply of
20 warriors.
7.3.2 Step 2: Place Roost and Starting Warriors. Place
1 roost and 6 warriors in a corner clearing that is
not the starting corner clearing of another play-
er and, if possible, is diagonally opposite from a
starting corner clearing. This is your starting clear-
ing. (This is updated from earlier printings for flexibility.)
7.3.3 Step 3: Choose Leader. Choose 1 of the 4 Eyrie
leader cards and place it in your Leader Card slot.
Gather the remaining leaders face up near you.
7.3.4 Step 4: Tuck Viziers. Tuck your 2 Loyal Vizier
cards, showing their suit, into the Decree columns
above your faction board as listed on your leader.
7.3.5 Step 5: Fill Roosts Track. Place your 6 remaining
roosts on your Roosts track from right to left.
7.4 Birdsong
Your Birdsong has three steps in the following order.
7.4.1 Emergency Orders. If you have no cards in your
hand, draw one card.
7.4.2 Add to the Decree. You must add one or two cards
to the Decree, but only one card added may be a
bird card. You may play each card to any column,
and each column can hold any number of cards.
7.4.3 A New Roost. If you have no roosts on the map,
place a roost and three warriors in a clearing
with the fewest warriors where all those pieces
can be placed.
6

7.5 Daylight
Your Daylight has two steps in the following order.
7.5.1 Craft. You may activate roosts to craft cards from
your hand.
7.5.2 Resolve the Decree. You must resolve the Decree,
starting with the leftmost column and moving
right. In each column, you must resolve all of its
cards, but in any order. For each card, you must
take the action listed for its column, as follows. If
you cannot fully take an action, you immediately
fall into turmoil (7.7).
I Recruit. Place a warrior in any clearing with a
roost whose suit matches the card suit.
II Move. Move from any clearing whose suit
matches the card suit. (You must move at least
one warrior.)
III Battle. Initiate a battle in any clearing whose
suit matches the card suit.
IV Build. Place a roost in any clearing you rule
whose suit matches the card suit and which
has no roost.
7.6 Evening
Your Evening has two steps in the following order.
7.6.1 Score Points. Score the victory points listed on
the rightmost empty space of your Roosts track.
7.6.2 Draw and Discard. Draw one card, plus one card
per uncovered draw bonus. Then, if you have
more than five cards in your hand, discard cards
of your choice until you have five.
7.7 Turmoil
If you cannot fully take an action in the Decree (7.5.2)
for any reason, you fall into turmoil. You must take the
Turmoil action as follows in order.
7.7.1 Step 1: Humiliate. Lose one victory point per
bird card (including Loyal Viziers) on the Decree.
7.7.2 Step 2: Purge. Discard all of the cards on the De-
cree except your Loyal Viziers.
7.7.3 Step 3: Depose. Flip your current leader face
down and set it aside, choose a new leader from
those face up, and place on your faction board.
Tuck your Loyal Viziers into the Decree spaces
listed on your new leader.
I A New Clutch. If you must choose a new lead-
er but none are face up, flip them all face up.
7.7.4 Step 4: Rest. End Daylight and begin Evening.
7.8 Leaders Reference
The Eyrie have four leader cards, as follows.
7.8.1 Builder. Loyal Viziers begin on Recruit and Move.
Whenever you craft, you ignore your Disdain for
Trade special ability (7.2.3).
7.8.2 Charismatic. Loyal Viziers begin on Recruit and
Battle. Whenever you take a Recruit action, you
must place two warriors instead of one.

7.8.3 Commander. Loyal Viziers begin on Move and
Battle. In battle as attacker, you deal an extra hit.
7.8.4 Despot. Loyal Viziers begin on Move and Build.
Whenever you remove at least one enemy build-
ing or token in battle, you score one extra victory
point (two in total, 3.2.1).
A
8. Woodland Alliance
8.1 Overview
The Woodland Alliance works to gain the sympathy of
the various creatures of the Woodland who are dissatis-
fied with their present condition. Each time the Alliance
places a sympathy token, they may score victory points.
The more sympathy on the map they have, the more
victory points they score. Gaining the sympathy of the
people requires supporters. These supporters can also
be put toward violent ends, inciting outright rebellion
across the forest. When a revolt erupts, the Alliance will
establish a base. Bases allow the Alliance to train offi-
cers, increasing their military flexibility.
8.2 Faction Rules and Abilities
8.2.1 Crafting. The Alliance crafts during Daylight by
activating sympathy tokens.
8.2.2 Guerrilla War. As defender in battle, the Alliance
will deal hits equal to the higher roll, and the at-
tacker will deal hits equal to the lower roll.
8.2.3 The Supporters Stack. To take various actions,
the Alliance spends supporters, which are cards
on their Supporters stack. Supporters can only be
spent for their suit and do not count against the
Alliance’s hand size. Supporters are face down,
but the Alliance may inspect them at any time.
I Capacity. If the Alliance has no bases on the
map, the Supporters stack can only hold up
to five cards. If the Alliance would gain a sup-
porter but the stack cannot hold it, that card
is discarded. If any bases are on the map, the
Supporters stack can hold unlimited cards.
8.2.4 Removing Bases. Whenever a base is removed,
the Alliance must discard all supporters matching
the printed suit of the base (including birds) and re-
move half of their officers, rounded up. If the Alli-
ance has no more bases on the map and has more
than five supporters, they must discard down to
five supporters.
8.2.5 Sympathy Tokens. The Alliance has 10 sympa-
thy tokens.
I Placement Limits. A clearing can hold only
one sympathy token.
II Terms. A sympathetic clearing is one with a
sympathy token. An unsympathetic clearing
is one without a sympathy token.
8.2.6 Outrage. Whenever another player removes a
sympathy token or moves any warriors into a sym-
pathetic clearing, they must add one card match-
ing the affected clearing from their hand to the

Supporters stack. If they have no matching cards
(including no birds), they must show their hand to
the Alliance, and then the Alliance draws a card
from the deck and adds it to the Supporters stack.
8.3 Faction Setup
8.3.1 Step 1: Gather Warriors. Form a supply of
10 warriors.
8.3.2 Step 2: Place Bases. Place 3 bases on the match-
ing spaces in your Bases box.
8.3.3 Step 3: Fill Sympathy Track. Place 10 sympathy
tokens on your Sympathy track.
8.3.4 Step 4: Gain Supporters. Draw 3 cards and place
them face down on your Supporters stack.
8.4 Birdsong
Your Birdsong has two steps in the following order.
8.4.1 Revolt. Any number of times, you may take the
Revolt action, as follows.
I Step 1: Choose Clearing. Choose a sympa-
thetic clearing that matches a base on your fac-
tion board.
II Step 2: Spend Supporters. Spend two support-
ers matching the suit of the chosen clearing.
III Step 3: Resolve Effect. Remove all enemy piec-
es from the chosen clearing. Then, place the
matching base there, and place warriors there
equal to the number of sympathetic clearings
matching the base’s printed suit. Finally, place
one warrior in the Officers box. This warrior is
now an officer. (Remember to score one victory
point per token and building removed.)
8.4.2 Spread Sympathy. Any number of times, you may
take the Spread Sympathy action, as follows.
I Step 1: Choose Clearing. Choose an unsym-
pathetic clearing adjacent to a sympathetic
clearing. If there are no sympathetic clearings,
you may choose any clearing.
II Step 2: Spend Supporters. Spend supporters
matching the suit of the chosen clearing. The
number of supporters that must be spent is
listed above the sympathy token.
a Martial Law. You must spend another
matching supporter if the target clearing
has at least 3 warriors of another player, in-
cluding warriors they are treating as their
own for rule (Mercenaries, hirelings, etc.).
III Step 3: Place and Score. Place a sympathy token
in the chosen clearing. Score the victory points
on the space uncovered on your faction board.
8.5 Daylight
You may take the following actions in any order and
number.
8.5.1 Craft. You may activate sympathy tokens to craft
a card from your hand.
8.5.2 Mobilize. Add a card from your hand to the Sup-
porters stack.
7

8.5.3 Train. Spend a card whose suit matches the print-
ed suit of a base on the map to place a warrior in
the Officers box. This warrior is now an officer.
8.6 Evening
Your Evening has two steps in the following order.
8.6.1 Military Operations. You may take actions, as
follows, up to your number of officers, in any or-
der and number.
I Move. Take one move.
II Battle. Initiate a battle.
III Recruit. Place a warrior in any clearing with
a base.
IV Organize. Remove one Alliance warrior from
an unsympathetic clearing, place a sympathy
token there, and score the victory points listed
on the space uncovered on your faction board.
8.6.2 Draw and Discard. Draw one card, plus one card
per uncovered draw bonus. Then, if you have
more than five cards in your hand, discard cards
of your choice until you have five.
V
9. Vagabond
9.1 Overview
The Vagabond plays all sides of the conflict while going
on quests to increase his renown throughout the wood.
Each time the Vagabond improves his relationship
with another faction, or removes a warrior belonging to
a faction hostile toward him, he scores victory points.
He can also complete quests to score victory points. To
move and act effectively the Vagabond must manage his
pack of items, expanding his selection by exploring the
forest ruins and providing aid to other factions.
9.2 Faction Rules and Abilities
9.2.1 Crafting. The Vagabond exhausts H to craft. All
of his H match the suit of his current clearing. If
the Vagabond crafts an item, he may immediately
take it, face up.
9.2.2 Lone Wanderer. The Vagabond pawn is not a war-
rior (so he cannot rule a clearing or stop another player
from ruling one). The Vagabond pawn cannot be
removed from the map.
I Full Removal. Whenever an enemy player uses
an effect that says it removes all enemy pieces
from a clearing (such as Alliance revolts, Favor of
the Mice cards, Conspiracy bombs) with the Vaga-
bond, the Vagabond damages three items.
9.2.3 Nimble. The Vagabond can move regardless of
who rules his origin or destination clearing (4.2.1).
9.2.4 Defenseless. In battle, the Vagabond is defense-
less (4.3.2.II) if he has no undamaged S.
9.2.5 Items. The Vagabond’s capabilities depend on the
items he acquires. Instead of a Crafted Items box,
he has a Satchel and various item tracks. Items on
the Vagabond’s faction board can be face up or
8

face down. The Vagabond exhausts face-up un-
damaged items, flipping them face down, to take
many actions.
I Item Tracks. When gained or flipped face up in
the Satchel, T, X, and B are placed face up on
their matching tracks. When flipped face down,
T, X, or B on tracks are placed face down
in the Satchel. Each track can only hold three
matching items.
II The Satchel. When gained, M, S, C, F, and
H are placed face up in the Vagabond’s Satchel.
9.2.6 Maximum Rolled Hits. In battle, the Vagabond’s
maximum rolled hits (4.3.2.I) equals his undam-
aged S, face up or face down, in his Satchel.
9.2.7 Taking Hits. Whenever the Vagabond takes a hit
(4.3.3), he must damage one undamaged item,
moving it to his Damaged box. If no undamaged
items remain to damage, the Vagabond ignores
any remaining hits.
9.2.8 Dominance Cards and Coalitions. The Vagabond
cannot activate a dominance card for its normal
victory condition (3.3.1). Instead, in games with
four or more players, the Vagabond can activate a
dominance card to form a coalition with another
player, placing his score marker on that player’s
faction board. (The Vagabond no longer scores points.)
That player must have fewer victory points than
each other player except the Vagabond forming
the coalition, and that player cannot be in a coa-
lition. If there is a tie for fewest victory points, he
chooses one tied player. If the coalitioned player
wins the game, the Vagabond also wins.
9.2.9 Relationships. Your faction board shows a Rela-
tionships chart, which has four spaces on the Al-
lied track and one Hostile box. It holds a relation-
ship marker for each non-Vagabond faction.
I Improving Relationships. You can improve a
relationship with a non-Hostile faction by tak-
ing the Aid action.
a Cost. Aid a non-Hostile faction the number
of times listed between their current Allied
space and their next Allied space during the
same turn. (A given Aid action counts toward
only one improvement in relationship.)

b Effect. Advance that faction’s relationship
marker one space right on the track. Score
the victory points listed in the new space.
II Allied Status. If a relationship marker reaches
the final space on the Allied track, you are now
Allied with the faction shown by that relation-
ship marker. (Their warriors trust you!)
a Aiding Ally. Each time you Aid an Allied
faction, score two victory points.
b Moving with Ally. Whenever you move to
an adjacent clearing, you may also force war-
riors of one Allied faction to move from your
origin clearing to your destination clearing
along with your Vagabond pawn.
c Attacking with Ally. At the start of battle as
the attacker, you may treat the warriors of
one Allied faction in the clearing of battle as
your own. The maximum hits you can roll
equals the number of their warriors there
plus your total undamaged S. You cannot
treat Allied warriors as your own when at-
tacking the same Allied faction.
d Taking Hits with Ally. In a battle where you
treat Allied warriors as your own, you can
take hits by removing them. However, if you
take more hits by removing Allied warriors
than by damaging items during the same
battle, that Allied faction becomes Hostile
(9.2.9.III) at the end of the battle. This rule
overrides the condition for becoming Hos-
tile in 9.2.9.III.
III Hostile Status. If you remove a warrior of a
non-Hostile faction, move their relationship
marker to the Hostile box. This faction is now
Hostile. Then, if this happened in battle during
your turn, check for Infamy scoring (9.2.9.IIIa).
a Infamy. Score one extra victory point for
each piece of a Hostile faction you remove
in battle during your turn, except the war-
rior that made the faction Hostile. (Add this
to points scored for enemy buildings and tokens.)
b Moving into Hostile Clearings. You must
exhaust an extra M to move into a clearing
with any warriors of any Hostile faction.
c Aiding Hostile Factions. You cannot move
a relationship marker out of the Hostile box
by using Aid, but you can still Aid a Hostile
faction to take crafted items.
d Coalition with Hostile Faction. You can
form a coalition (9.2.8) with a Hostile fac-
tion. If you do, move their relationship
marker to the Indifferent space.
9.3 Faction Setup
9.3.1 Step 1: Choose Character. Choose a character
card and place it in your Character Card slot.
9.3.2 Step 2: Place Pawn. Place your Vagabond pawn
in any forest.

9.3.3 Step 3: Get Quests. Shuffle your quest deck, draw
3 quest cards, and place them face up near you.
9.3.4 Step 4: Populate Ruins. Take the 4 ruins from the
map, and take the B, M, H, and S items marked
with an “R.” Place one beneath each ruin and then
shuffle each ruin stack. Then, return each stack to
an empty ruin slot on the map.
9.3.5 Step 5: Take Starting Items. Take the items
marked with an “S” listed on your character card.
Place any listed T, X, and B items face up on the
matching tracks of your faction board. Place all
other listed items face up in your Satchel. Return
any remaining “S” items to the box.
9.3.6 Step 6: Set Relationships. Take a relationship
marker for each non-Vagabond faction and place
them all on the Indifferent space of your Relation-
ships chart.
9.4 Birdsong
Your Birdsong has two steps in the following order.
9.4.1 Refresh. Flip two exhausted items face up for each
T face up on the Refresh track at the start of your
Birdsong. Then flip up three more exhausted items.
9.4.2 Slip. You may move into an adjacent clearing or
forest without exhausting any M, even for moving
into a Hostile clearing (9.2.9.IIIb). This move ig-
nores all effects that prevent movement out of a
clearing (such as the Corvids’ snare).
9.5 Daylight
You can exhaust items to take the following actions, in
any order and number. If you exhaust a X, T, or B on
a track, move it to the Satchel.
9.5.1 Move. Exhaust one M to move, plus one M if the
destination clearing has any Hostile warriors. You
cannot move into a forest. If in a forest, you may
only move into an adjacent clearing.
9.5.2 Battle. Exhaust one S to initiate a battle. (Check
your relationship with the defender.)
9.5.3 Explore. Exhaust one F to take one item under
a ruin in your clearing, reveal it, and place it face
up in your Satchel or on its matching track. If you
take an item, score one victory point. If you re-
move the last item from a ruin, remove the ruin.
9.5.4 Aid. Exhaust any one item, and give one of your
cards matching your clearing to any player with
faction pieces there (even Hostile). Then, you may
take one item, if any, from that player’s Crafted
Items box, and place it face up in your Satchel or
on its matching track. (Check your relationship with
that player’s faction.)
9.5.5 Quest. Choose a quest whose suit matches your
clearing, and exhaust the two items listed on the
quest to complete it. Place the quest in your play
area, and then draw a new quest and place it near
the map. You may score one victory point per quest
of matching suit you have completed, including
this one, or draw two cards from the deck.
9

9.5.6 Strike. Exhaust one C to remove an enemy war- The next two sections refer to factions
rior from your clearing. If that enemy has no war- in The Riverfolk Expansion.
riors there, you may instead remove one of their
other faction pieces there. (Check your relationship L
10. Lizard Cult
with that player’s faction.)
9.5.7 Repair. Exhaust one H to move one damaged 10.1 Overview
item to the Satchel, keeping the item on its cur-
Catering to the discarded creatures of the Woodland,
rent side. (Face-up X, T, and B immediately move
the Lizard Cult seeks to overwhelm its foes through
to their tracks.)
sheer force of will. Wherever the Cult rules clearings, it
9.5.8 Craft. Play a card from your hand, and exhaust the can build gardens, using word of mouth and beak to
H of listed suit to craft it. All of your H match the spread its gospel to the animals living there. The firmer
suit of your clearing. If a card requires multiple of its hold over the hearts of its followers, the more victory
one suit to craft, you must exhaust the listed num- points the Cult can score by completing the proper rit-
ber of H. If you craft an item, you may place it face uals. While other factions spend cards to achieve their
up in your Satchel or on the matching track. aims, the Cult acts chiefly by revealing cards and grad-
9.5.9 Special Action. Exhaust one F to take the action ually gathering a set of ideal followers. These revealed
listed on your character card. cards are returned to the Cult’s hand in Evening, unless
discarded to score victory points. However, this gentler
9.6 Evening
approach makes movement and battle difficult—the
Your Evening has four steps, as follows. Cult can only take these actions with its radicalized ac-
9.6.1 Rest. If you are in a forest, move all items in your olytes, gained as the Cult’s warriors are slaughtered
Damaged box to your Satchel or their matching while defending in battle.
track, and flip them face up.
10.2 Faction Rules and Abilities
9.6.2 Draw Cards. Draw one card, plus one card per X
face up on the matching track. 10.2.1 Crafting. The Cult crafts during Evening by ac-
tivating gardens whose printed suit matches the
9.6.3 Discard Cards. If you have more than five cards Outcast suit (10.4.1). (Generally this matches the
in your hand, discard cards of your choice until
clearing, except with the Lost City landmark.)
you have five.
10.2.2 Hatred of Birds. Bird cards are not wild for
9.6.4 Check Item Capacity. If you have more items Cult rituals.
total in your Satchel and Damaged box than
your item limit—six plus two per B face up on 10.2.3 Revenge. Whenever a Cult warrior is removed
while defending in battle, it is placed in the Aco-
the matching track—remove items from your
lytes box instead of the Cult’s supply.
Satchel and Damaged box until you have items
equal to your item limit, and remove them from 10.2.4 Pilgrims. The Cult rules any clearings where they
the game permanently. have any gardens. This overrides the Eyrie’s Lords
of the Forest (7.2.2).
9.7 Playing with Two Vagabonds
10.2.5 Fear of the Faithful. Whenever a garden is re-
If you have The Riverfolk Expansion, you can play a game moved, the Cult must discard a random card.
with two Vagabonds by following these rules.
10.2.6 The Lost Souls Pile. Whenever any card is spent
9.7.1 Setup. Use both sets of “R” items and place two or discarded (even a dominance card), place it in
random “R” items in each ruin slot. If you are us- the Lost Souls pile instead of the discard pile.
ing the Standard Setup (5.1), randomly determine The Lost Souls pile can be inspected by any play-
which Vagabond sets up first. er at any time.
9.7.2 Share Quests. Either Vagabond may complete 10.3 Faction Setup
any of the three face-up quests. Do not add extra
quest cards during setup. 10.3.1 Step 1: Gather Warriors. Form a supply of
25 warriors.
9.7.3 Taking Items from Ruins. When a Vagabond ex-
plores a ruin with two items, or the Hundreds raze 10.3.2 Step 2: Place Warriors. Place 4 warriors and 1 gar-
a ruin (14.4.1) with two items, that player may den of matching printed suit in a corner clearing
look at those items and take one of their choice. that is not the starting corner clearing of anoth-
(By taking two Explore actions, the Vagabond could er player and, if possible, is diagonally opposite
take both items from one ruin.) A player cannot take from a starting corner clearing. This is your start-
an “R” item if they have the same type of “R” item ing clearing. Then place 1 warrior in each adjacent
on their faction board. (If the Vagabond explores but clearing. (This is updated from earlier printings for
does not take an item, he does not score a victory point, flexibility.)
but the F is still exhausted.) 10.3.3 Step 3: Choose Outcast. Place the outcast marker
on any suit space in the Outcast box. The suit of
this space is called the Outcast.
10

10.3.4 Step 4: Fill Gardens Tracks. Place your 14 re- 10.6.3 Draw and Discard. Draw one card, plus one card
maining gardens on the matching spaces of your per uncovered draw bonus. Then, if you have
Gardens tracks from right to left. more than five cards in your hand, discard cards
of your choice until you have five.
10.4 Birdsong
O
Your Birdsong has three steps in the following order. 11. Riverfolk Company
10.4.1 Adjust Outcast. Look at the cards in the Lost
Souls pile, ignoring birds. The suit with the most 11.1 Overview
cards becomes the new Outcast—move the out-
When news arrived that the Woodland on the shore of
cast marker, showing its Outcast side, to that suit.
the great lake was descending into all-out war, the Riv-
If that suit was already the Outcast, flip the mark-
erfolk Company quickly dispatched its officers to set
er to Hated. If no one suit had the most cards,
up shop. As other factions purchase their services, the
the marker stays on its current suit and, if it is not
Riverfolk can further entrench their commercial inter-
Hated, flips to its Hated side.
ests by establishing trade posts along the river, scor-
10.4.2 Discard Lost Souls. Discard all of the cards in ing victory points. So too can they score points by raw
the Lost Souls pile to the discard pile. (Dominance accumulation of funds, but a big treasury makes for an
cards become available to take.) easy target, so the Riverfolk must take care in expand-
10.4.3 Perform Conspiracies. You can spend acolytes, ing their operations across the dangerous forest.
returning them to your supply, to perform con-
11.2 Faction Rules and Abilities
spiracies in clearings matching the Outcast, in
any order and number, as follows. If the Outcast 11.2.1 Crafting. The Riverfolk craft during Daylight by
committing funds to empty spaces on the Trade
is Hated, the conspiracy costs one fewer acolyte.
Posts tracks. (They have no crafting pieces.)
I Crusade. Spend two acolytes to initiate a
battle in an Outcast clearing or to move (at 11.2.2 Swimmers. The Riverfolk treat rivers as paths and
least one warrior) from an Outcast clearing and may move along rivers regardless of who rules
their origin or destination clearing. (They can still
then, if you wish, initiate a battle in the desti-
move using paths.)
nation clearing.
II Convert. Spend two acolytes to replace an en- 11.2.3 Public Hand. The Riverfolk place their hand face
up above their faction board. If another player
emy warrior from an Outcast clearing with a
Cult warrior. (To replace a piece, you must be able would take a random card from the Riverfolk’s
to remove the old piece and place the new piece.) hand, the cards are flipped face down, shuffled,
drawn from, and then flipped face up.
III Sanctify. Spend three acolytes to replace an
enemy building from an Outcast clearing with 11.2.4 Funds. To take many actions, the Riverfolk com-
mit and spend funds: warriors in their Funds box.
a garden of the Outcast suit.
10.5 Daylight 11.2.5 Trade Posts. The Riverfolk score victory points
when they place trade posts.
You may reveal any number of cards and perform one
I Trade Disruption. Whenever a trade post is
ritual per card revealed, in any order and number, as
removed, the Riverfolk remove half of their
follows. (Reveal cards from your hand into your play area.
funds, rounded up, and remove the trade post
They cannot be used for any other purposes during Daylight.)
from the game permanently.
10.5.1 Build. In a clearing you rule matching the re- 11.2.6 Buying Services. At the start of another player’s
vealed card, place a matching garden.
Birdsong, that player may buy Riverfolk services.
10.5.2 Recruit. In a clearing matching the revealed card, I Cost. The buyer must place warriors from
place a warrior.
their supply into the Riverfolk’s Payments box
10.5.3 Score. Spend the same card you reveal (placing in equal in number to the cost of that service list-
Lost Souls) to score the victory points listed above ed on the Riverfolk’s Services track.
the rightmost empty Gardens space of the suit
II Number of Services. Each turn, a player may
matching the revealed card. You may perform this
buy one service plus one per clearing with a
only once per turn per suit.
trade post and their faction pieces.
10.5.4 Sacrifice. Place a warrior in the Acolytes box. To III Vagabond Funds. The Vagabond pays for ser-
perform this ritual, you must reveal a bird card.
vices by exhausting items—for each item he
10.6 Evening exhausts to do so, the Riverfolk place one Riv-
erfolk warrior in the Payments box.
Your Evening has three steps in the following order.
11.2.7 Riverfolk Services. The Riverfolk offer three ser-
10.6.1 Return Revealed Cards. Return all cards you re- vices, as follows.
vealed this turn to your hand.
I Hand Card. The buyer takes any card from the
10.6.2 Craft. You may craft by activating gardens whose Riverfolk’s hand and adds it to their hand. (The
printed suit matches the Outcast suit.
11

buyer may buy this service multiple times as long
as they have access to enough trade posts.)
II Riverboats. The buyer treats rivers as paths
until the end of their turn.
III Mercenaries. During Daylight and Evening
of this turn, except when battling the River-
folk, the buyer treats Riverfolk warriors as
their own for rule and for battle. (The buyer
cannot move them, count them toward domi-
nance, or remove them except by taking hits. They
are still Riverfolk faction pieces, so they cannot be
affected by abilities such as the Marquise’s Field
Hospitals or used in actions such as the Duchy’s
Sway Ministers.)
a Taking Hits. The buyer must split hits,
taking odd hits by removing owned
(not Riverfolk) warriors, if any, or owned
buildings or tokens only if they have no
warriors (including Riverfolk) in the clear-
ing of battle.
b Vagabond Mercenaries. The Vagabond
cannot buy Riverfolk mercenaries. (If a
buyer battles the Vagabond and a Riverfolk
mercenary warrior is removed, the buyer’s fac-
tion becomes Hostile, not the Riverfolk.)
11.3 Faction Setup
11.3.1 Step 1: Gather Warriors. Form a supply of
15 warriors.
11.3.2 Step 2: Place Warriors. Place 4 warriors in any
clearings touching the river.
11.3.3 Step 3: Fill Trade Posts Tracks. Place 9 trade
posts on the matching spaces of your Trade
Posts tracks.
11.3.4 Step 4: Gain Starting Funds. Place 3 warriors
in your Payments box.
11.3.5 Step 5: Set Starting Prices. Place 1 service mark-
er on any space of each of your Services tracks.
11.4 Birdsong
Your Birdsong has three steps in the following order.
11.4.1 Protectionism. If the Payments box is empty,
place two warriors in it.
11.4.2 Score Dividends. If there are any trade posts on
the map, score one victory point per two funds.
(Do not score for warriors in Payments or Committed.)
11.4.3 Gather Funds. Move all warriors on your fac-
tion board to the Funds box.
11.5 Daylight
You can commit and spend funds to take actions, as
follows, in any order and number. When you commit a
fund, move the warrior to the Committed box. When you
spend a fund, return the warrior to its owner’s supply.
11.5.1 Move. Commit one fund to take a move.
11.5.2 Battle. Commit one fund to initiate a battle.
11.5.3 Craft. Commit funds to craft a card from your
12

hand. Instead of moving these warriors to the
Committed box, you must place them on emp-
ty spaces of the Trade Posts tracks matching the
suits listed on the crafting cost.
I Export. You may ignore the listed benefit of
crafting a card, discarding it, to place one Riv-
erfolk warrior in the Payments box.
11.5.4 Draw. Commit one fund to draw a card.
11.5.5 Recruit. Spend one fund to place a warrior in any
clearing with a river.
11.5.6 Establish Trade Post with Garrison. Spend two
funds to place a trade post and a warrior.
I Choose Clearing. Choose any clearing with-
out a trade post that is ruled by any player.
II Spend Funds. Spend two funds of the player
who rules the chosen clearing.
III Place and Score. Place the matching trade
post and one warrior in the chosen clearing.
Score the victory points listed on the space un-
covered on your faction board.
11.6 Evening
Your Evening has two steps in the following order.
11.6.1 Discard Cards. If you have more than five cards
in your hand, discard cards of your choice until
there are five.
11.6.2 Set Costs. You may move each service marker to
any space on its track, setting it to a new cost.
The next two sections refer to factions in
The Underworld Expansion.
D
12. Underground Duchy
12.1 Overview
The Underground Duchy wants to show the foreign
creatures of the Woodland that they would be better
off as subjects. As they set up frontier outposts to show
their power in the Woodland, the Duchy can sway min-
isters to the cause, scoring victory points and diverting
more of the Duchy’s resources. But be careful—a rever-
sal of fortune could spell public humiliation, leading
ministers to abandon the task.
12.2 Faction Rules and Abilities
12.2.1 Crafting. The Duchy crafts during Evening by ac-
tivating citadels and markets.
12.2.2 The Burrow. The Burrow is an unsuited clear-
ing adjacent to each clearing with a tunnel token.
Non-Duchy pieces cannot be placed in or moved
into the Burrow. The Duchy always rules the Bur-
row (even with no pieces there).
12.2.3 The Price of Failure. Whenever any number of
Duchy buildings are removed, the Duchy returns
their swayed minister card of highest rank (lord,
then noble, then squire) to their Unswayed Minis-
ters pile, and removes its crown from the game

permanently, then discards a random card. If they
have multiple swayed ministers of highest rank,
the Duchy chooses which to return.
12.2.4 Tunnels. The Duchy has three tunnel tokens. If
the Duchy is prompted to place a tunnel but all
three tunnels are on the map, the Duchy may first
remove any tunnel from the map.
12.3 Faction Setup
12.3.1 Step 1: Gather Warriors and Tunnels. Form sup-
plies of 20 warriors and 3 tunnel tokens.
12.3.2 Step 2: Prepare the Burrow. Place the Burrow
board near the map.
12.3.3 Step 3: Surface. Place 2 warriors and 1 tunnel in
a corner clearing that is not the starting corner
clearing of another player and, if possible, is di-
agonally opposite from a starting corner clearing.
This is your starting clearing. Then place 2 war-
riors in each clearing adjacent to the chosen corner
clearing, except the Burrow. (This is updated from
earlier printings for flexibility.)
12.3.4 Step 4: Fill Buildings Tracks. Place 3 citadels and
3 markets on your matching Buildings spaces.
12.3.5 Step 5: Collect Ministers. Place 9 minister cards
face up on your Unswayed Ministers pile.
12.3.6 Step 6: Fill Crown Spaces. Place 9 crowns on the
spaces with victory points on your faction board.
12.4 Birdsong
Place one warrior, plus one warrior per warrior icon
showing, in the Burrow.
12.5 Daylight
Your Daylight has three steps in the following order.
12.5.1 Assembly. You may take up to two actions in any
order and number, as follows.
I Build. Reveal one card to place a citadel or
market in a matching clearing you rule.
II Recruit. Place one warrior in the Burrow.
III Move. Take a move.
IV Battle. Initiate a battle.
V Dig. Spend one card to place a tunnel token
in a matching clearing without a tunnel token.
Then, move up to four warriors from the Bur-
row to that clearing. (If all three tunnels are on
the map, you may remove a tunnel first.)
12.5.2 Parliament. You may take the action of each
swayed minister once in any order.
I Foremole. Reveal any card to place a citadel or
market in any clearing (matching or not) you rule.
II Captain. Initiate a battle.
III Marshal. Take a move.
IV Brigadier. Take up to two moves or initiate up
to two battles.
V Banker. Spend any number of cards (even
one) of the same suit to score victory points in
equal number.

VI Mayor. Take the action of any swayed noble
or squire.
VII Duchess of Mud. Score two victory points if
all three tunnels are on the map.
VIII Baron of Dirt. Score one victory point per
market on the map.
IX Earl of Stone. Score one victory point per cit-
adel on the map.
12.5.3 Sway. You may sway one minister, as follows.
I Choose Minister. Choose a minister card in
your Unswayed Ministers pile. You must have
a crown on your faction board matching the
rank (squire, noble, lord) of that minister.
II Reveal Cards. Reveal the number of cards
listed on the chosen minister. For each card
you wish to reveal, you must have at least one
Duchy piece in a clearing matching the suit of
that card. Each such clearing allows you to re-
veal one matching card.
III Sway Minister and Score. Take the chosen
minister card and place it above your faction
board. Take a crown of that minister’s rank
from your faction board and place it on the
minister card. Score the victory points listed
on the space uncovered on your faction board.
12.6 Evening
Your Evening has three steps in the following order.
12.6.1 Discard and Return Revealed Cards. Discard any
bird cards you revealed this turn, then return all
other cards you revealed this turn to your hand.
12.6.2 Craft. You may craft by activating citadels and
markets. (These are identical for crafting purposes.)
12.6.3 Draw and Discard. Draw one card, plus one card
per card draw icon showing. Then, if you have
more than five cards in your hand, discard cards
of your choice until you have five.
13

C 13.5 Daylight
13. Corvid Conspiracy
You may take up to three actions, as follows, in any or-
der and number.
13.1 Overview
13.5.1 Move. Take a move.
The Corvid Conspiracy seeks to strong-arm the Wood-
land into submission by completing criminal plots, 13.5.2 Plot. Remove a Corvid warrior, plus another Cor-
vid warrior per plot you have placed this turn,
scoring victory points each time they flip one. The more
from a clearing with no plot tokens to place a face-
revealed plots on the map, the more they score. Mis-
down plot token there.
direction is critical—if their plans are too obvious, the
Corvids risk exposure. To avoid this, they must recruit 13.5.3 Battle. Initiate a battle.
carefully and look for any opportunities for subterfuge 13.5.4 Trick. Swap two plot tokens on the map. Both
and extortion. plot tokens must be face up or face down.
13.2 Faction Rules and Abilities 13.6 Evening
13.2.1 Crafting. The Corvids craft during Birdsong by Your Evening has two steps in the following order.
activating plot tokens (whether face up or down).
13.6.1 Exert. You may take one action listed in Daylight
13.2.2 Plot Tokens. The Corvids have eight plot tokens, if you choose to not draw cards during Evening.
two of each type.
13.6.2 Draw. Draw one card plus one card per face-up
I Token Facing. While in the Corvids’ supply, extortion token on the map. Then, if you have
plot tokens are face down (feather). While on more than five cards, discard down to five cards.
the map, a plot token can be face up (unique
icon) or face down. The Corvids can inspect 13.7 Plot Tokens Reference
any facedown plot token at any time. 13.7.1 Bomb. Whenever a bomb token is flipped, re-
II Placement Limits. Each clearing can hold move all enemy pieces in its clearing, then remove
only one plot token. the bomb token.
13.2.3 Nimble. The Corvids can move regardless of who 13.7.2 Snare. While a snare token is face up, enemy piec-
rules their origin or destination clearing. es cannot be placed in or moved from its clearing.
13.2.4 Exposure. Anytime on their turn, but before draw- 13.7.3 Extortion. Whenever an extortion token is flipped,
ing any cards in their Evening, an enemy player take a random card from each enemy player with
with faction pieces in a clearing with a facedown faction pieces in its clearing. While an extortion to-
plot token may show the Corvids a matching card ken is face up, you draw another card in Evening.
to guess the type of plot token in that clearing. 13.7.4 Raid. Whenever a raid token is removed (face up or
If incorrect, the Corvids say “no,” and the enemy down), place one warrior in each clearing adjacent
player gives that card to the Corvids. If correct, to the clearing from which the raid was removed.
the enemy player removes the plot token (scoring a (Ignore this effect if the raid is removed by Exposure.).
victory point) and ignores its effect.
13.2.5 Embedded Agents. As defender in battle, if the The next two sections refer to factions in
Corvids have a facedown plot token (even defense- The Marauder Expansion
less) in the clearing of battle, they deal an extra hit.
H
13.3 Faction Setup 14. Lord of the Hundreds
13.3.1 Step 1: Gather Warriors and Plots. Form sup-
14.1 Overview
plies of 15 warriors and 8 plot tokens face down.
13.3.2 Step 2: Scatter. Place 1 warrior in any clearing of The Lord of the Hundreds suffers no fools and allows
each suit (total of 3). no dissent. During their Evening, they score points
based on how well they oppress their foes. The more
13.4 Birdsong clearings they rule that have a Hundreds piece and no
Your Birdsong has three steps in the following order. enemy pieces—no warriors, no buildings, nothing—the
more points they score. To grow in power and attract
13.4.1 Craft. You may activate plot tokens (whether face
warriors, the Hundreds must gain items and add them
up or down) to craft cards from your hand.
to their towering Hoard. Leading the Hundreds is the
13.4.2 Flip Plots. Any number of times, flip a plot token warlord, a warrior-demagogue whose fickle mood
face up in a clearing with any Corvid warriors,
gives them an ability for the turn. Their warlord is ob-
score one victory point per face-up plot token on
sessed with hoarding, so as the Hundreds gain more
the map (including the newly flipped one), and then
items, they will have fewer moods to choose from. De-
resolve its flip effect if it is a bomb or extortion.
claring themselves as the true voice of the Woodland,
13.4.3 Recruit. Once per turn, you may spend any card the Hundreds can incite mobs, which destroy enemy
to place one warrior in each matching clearing. (If buildings and tokens, and raid ruins for items.
you spend a bird, choose one suit to place warriors in.)
14

14.2 Faction Rules and Abilities
14.2.1 Crafting. The Hundreds craft during Daylight by
activating strongholds.
14.2.2 The Warlord. The Hundreds have a piece called
the warlord. The warlord is a warrior that cannot
be removed outside of battle, moved outside of
the Hundreds’ turn, or placed in ways other than
setup (14.3.2) and the Anoint action (14.4.3).
14.2.3 Contempt for Trade. Whenever the Hundreds
craft an item, they may take the item but score
none of the listed victory points, or may remove the
item permanently to score the listed victory points.
(They can still score extra crafting points from effects such
as Master Engravers and the Legendary Forge.)
14.2.4 The Hoard. Instead of a Crafted Items box, the
Hundreds have the Hoard box. This has two
tracks, Command and Prowess. The Command
track can hold M, B, and X. The Prowess track
can hold H, T, S, and C.
I Gaining Items. When the Hundreds gain an
item, they put it in the leftmost empty Com-
mand or Prowess space based on the item type;
if there is no such empty space, they must per-
manently remove the gained item or any item
on that track, and they score one victory point.
II Command and Prowess. The number of items
on the Command and Prowess tracks deter-
mine their Command and Prowess, which af-
fect various parts of their rules. With no items,
they have 1 Command or Prowess; with one or
two items, they have 2; with three items, they
have 3; with four items, they have 4.
14.2.5 Looters. At the start of battle as the attacker, the
Hundreds may declare that they want to loot the
defender, so long as the defender has an item in
their Crafted Items box. (They cannot loot the Vag-
abond.) If they declare that they want to loot, the
Hundreds deal no rolled hits. (The defender deals
rolled hits, and the Hundreds can still deal extra hits,
such as from their Wrathful mood.) Then, at the end
of that battle, if the Hundreds rule the clearing
of battle, they take one item from the defender’s
Crafted Items box.
14.3 Faction Setup
14.3.1 Step 1: Gather Pieces. Form supplies of 20 war-
riors, 1 warlord, and 6 strongholds.
14.3.2 Step 2: Garrison. Place your warlord, four war-
riors, and one stronghold in a corner clearing that
is not the starting corner clearing of another play-
er and, if possible, is diagonally opposite from a
starting corner clearing.
14.3.3 Step 3: Place Items. Place the four “R” items
randomly under the ruins, unless this has already
been done.
14.3.4 Step 4: Get Stubborn. Place your Stubborn
mood card on your Mood Card slot.

14.4 Birdsong
Your Birdsong has four steps in the following order.
14.4.1 Raze. In each clearing with a mob token, remove
all enemy buildings and tokens, take one item
from the ruin in the clearing, if any, and remove
the ruin if you took its last item. After resolving
all mobs, you must roll the mob die once and
place a mob token in a matching clearing that has
no mob token but is adjacent to a clearing with
a mob token. (If there are no such clearings, do not
place a mob.)
14.4.2 Recruit. Place warriors equal in number to your
Prowess into the clearing with your warlord. Then,
place warriors in each clearing with any strong-
holds, one warrior per stronghold there.
14.4.3 Anoint. If the warlord is not on the map, you
must replace any Hundreds warrior on the map
with the warlord. If you cannot, you must place
the warlord in any clearing.
14.4.4 Choose Mood. You must replace the mood card
in your Mood Card slot with a different mood
card that does not show an item that is in your
Hoard. If you are Lavish and cannot choose a new
mood card, you remain Lavish.
14.5 Daylight
Your Daylight has three steps in the following order.
14.5.1 Craft. You may activate strongholds to craft cards.
14.5.2 Command the Hundreds. You may take the fol-
lowing actions, in any order, a number of times up
to your Command.
I Move. Take a move.
II Battle. Initiate a battle.
III Build. Spend a card to place a stronghold in a
matching clearing that you rule.
14.5.3 Advance the Warlord. You may take this action
a number of times up to your Prowess. You may
move the warlord with any Hundreds warriors,
and then you may battle in the warlord’s clearing.
14.6 Evening
Your Evening has three steps in the following order.
14.6.1 Incite. Any number of times, you may spend a
card to place a mob token in a matching clearing
that has no mob token but does have a Hundreds
warrior (including your warlord).
14.6.2 Oppress. You score victory points based on the
number of clearings you rule that have a Hundreds
piece and no enemy pieces. For one or two clear-
ings, score one point; for three or four clearings,
score two points; for five clearings, score three
points; for six or more clearings, score four points.
14.6.3 Draw and Discard. Draw one card. Then, if you
have more than five cards in your hand, discard
cards of your choice until you have five.
15

14.7 Moods
14.7.1 Bitter (H). In battle in your warlord’s clearing,
before the roll you may remove any number of
mob tokens from your warlord’s clearing and any
clearings adjacent to it. Place warriors in your
warlord’s clearing equal to the number of mob to-
kens you removed.
14.7.2 Grandiose (T). This turn, perform your Advance
the Warlord step (14.5.3) and your Command the
Hundreds step (14.5.2) in reverse order. (Advance
the Warlord first, then Command the Hundreds.)
14.7.3 Jubilant (M). Whenever you take the Incite ac-
tion in your warlord’s clearing, after placing the
mob token for the action, you may—up to four
times—roll the mob die and place a mob token in
a matching clearing that has no mob token but is
adjacent to any clearing with a mob token.
14.7.4 Lavish (No Item). At the end of your Birdsong,
you may remove any number of items from your
Hoard permanently. For each item you remove,
place two warriors into your warlord’s clearing.
When you are done, shift items in your Hoard to
fill its tracks from left to right.
14.7.5 Relentless (B). Whenever you take the Advance
the Warlord action and both move and battle, you
may then either move your warlord with any Hun-
dreds warriors or battle in your warlord’s clearing.
14.7.6 Rowdy (X). In Evening (14.6.3), draw one more
card. If your warlord’s clearing has three or more
enemy pieces (even a combination of pieces from
different enemies), draw two more cards instead.
14.7.7 Stubborn (C). In battle in your warlord’s clear-
ing, you ignore the first hit you take. (This does not
combine with other abilities that let you ignore the first
hit you take.)
14.7.8 Wrathful (S). As attacker in battle in your war-
lord’s clearing, you deal an extra hit.
K
15. Keepers in Iron
15.1 Overview
The Keepers in Iron are an order of devout knights,
once exiled from the Woodland, who have returned
to recover relics lost in past conflicts. Whether these
relics belong to the Keepers or the Woodland, though,
is another question. To accomplish their mission, they
will need to delve relics out of the forests, move them to
a waystation of the same type, and then recover them.
When they recover a relic, they score points equal to
the relic’s value of one to three, and they also score two
points each time they complete a set of the three rel-
ic types—figures, tablets, and jewelry. Over time, the
Keepers will gather a Retinue of Woodland creatures,
letting them take more actions. However, each time
they delve a relic or recover one, they might lose the
Retinue card they used to act, so they will need to plan
ahead and take prudent risks in order to succeed.
16

15.2 Faction Rules and Abilities
15.2.1 Relics. You seek out twelve relic tokens of three
types—figures, tablets, and jewelry. Each relic
type has four tokens in total. The relic front shows
only its type, and the relic back shows a value of
1, 2, 3, or 3.
15.2.2 Waystations. You have three waystations. Each
waystation shows one relic type on its front and
another relic type on its back.
15.2.3 Crafting. The Keepers craft during Daylight by
activating waystations (of any type).
15.2.4 Devout Knights. In battle, if the clearing of bat-
tle has at least one relic and at least one Keeper
warrior, the Keepers ignore the first hit they take.
(If ambushed, ignore one hit from the ambush, but do
not ignore further hits.) When moving, the Keepers
may move one relic with each Keeper warrior that
they move.
15.2.5 Prized Trophies. Whenever an enemy removes a
relic, they place it in any forest face up and score
an extra victory point (for a total of two).
15.3 Faction Setup
15.3.1 Step 1: Place Starting Relics. Collect all twelve
relic tokens and shuffle them face down (without
the value showing). Place one randomly in each
forest. (We recommend that you just slide the relics
around face down, then place relics as fast as possible as
a group. Otherwise, you can use this more random but
fiddly method: the Keepers stack the randomized relics,
then any other player cuts the stack, picks it up, and
drops relics one by one from the bottom onto the forests.)
15.3.2 Step 2: Gather Warriors. Form a supply of 15
warriors.
15.3.3 Step 3: Place Warriors. Place four warriors in
a corner clearing that is not the starting corner
clearing of another player and, if possible, is di-
agonally opposite from a starting corner clearing.
Then, place four warriors in a clearing on the map
edge that is adjacent to the chosen clearing.
15.3.4 Step 4: Place Remaining Relics. Place all remain-
ing relics randomly, as evenly as possible, among
forests not adjacent to clearings with your warriors.
15.3.5 Step 5: Tuck Faithful Retainers. Tuck one Faith-
ful Retainer card into each Retinue slot of your
faction board.
15.3.6 Step 6: Collect Waystations. Place your three
waystation buildings on the matching Waysta-
tions spaces of your faction board.
15.4 Birdsong
Your Birdsong has three steps in the following order.
15.4.1 Encamp. Once per clearing, you may replace a
Keeper warrior with a waystation. If you have no
warriors or waystations on the map, instead place
one waystation and one warrior in any clearing on
the map edge. In either case, you may place the
waystation face up or face down.

15.4.2 Decamp. Once per clearing, you may replace a Recover action and discard the Retinue card
waystation with a Keeper warrior. used to take this action. Otherwise, you may
15.4.3 Recruit. Any number of times, you may spend a return to the Take Relic step or end this Re-
card to place two warriors at a matching waystation. cover action.
15.5 Daylight 15.6 Evening
Your Daylight has two steps in the following order. Your Evening has three steps in the following order.
15.5.1 Craft. You may activate waystations (of any type) 15.6.1 Live Off the Land. You must remove one Keeper
to craft cards. warrior from each clearing that has four or more
Keeper warriors.
15.5.2 Act with Retinue. Starting with the leftmost col-
umn of your Retinue and moving to the right, you 15.6.2 Gather Retinue. You may add any number of
may take the column’s action, as follows, for each cards from your hand to any Retinue slots, or
card in the column in any order. you may shift one card in your Retinue to a dif-
ferent slot. Your Retinue cannot hold more than
I Move. Take a move from a clearing whose suit
ten cards.
matches the card suit.
15.6.3 Draw and Discard. Draw one card, plus one card
II Battle then Delve. Choose a clearing whose
per uncovered draw bonus (equal to waystations on the
suit matches the card suit. You must initiate
map). Then, if you have more than five cards in your
a battle there if any enemy pieces are there.
hand, discard cards of your choice until you have five.
Then, if you rule the clearing and it has at least
one Keeper warrior, you may delve there as fol-
lows (even if there was no enemy to battle). APPENDICES
a Step 1: Move and Flip Relic. Move any relic
from an adjacent forest into that clearing. Flip
that relic so its value is showing if it is not. A. Advanced Setup
b Step 2: Check for Discard. Count the num-
There are hundreds of ways to play Root. The icons next
ber of clearings you rule adjacent to the for-
to the setup steps note which Root products (Appendix
est from which you delved the relic. If you
B) include options for that step.
rule fewer of these clearings than the relic’s
value, then you must discard the Retinue A.1 Step 1: Choose and Set up Map L
card used to take this action.
As a group, choose a map. If you choose a variant map
III Move or Recover. Choose a clearing whose (Appendix C), follow its Setup Modification section,
suit matches the card suit. Take a move from it,
then collect the 12 suit markers, flip them face down,
or recover relics from it as follows.
and shuffle them, then place one on each clearing, cov-
a Step 1: Take Relic. Take a relic there of the ering the printed suit symbols if any. Set up the ruins
same type as a waystation there. Place it in (5.1.4), item supply (5.1.5), and dice (5.1.6) as normal.
your leftmost empty Relics space of that
A.2 Step 2: Choose Deck P
relic type.
As a group, you may choose to replace the entire stan-
b Step 2: Score Points. Score victory points
dard deck with the Exiles and Partisans deck.
equal to the relic’s value, and score two vic-
tory points if you filled a Relics column. A.3 Step 3: Set Up Bots C
c Step 3: Check for Discard. Count the num- As a group, you may choose to play with bots, as de-
ber of clearings you rule whose suit matches
scribed in the Law of Rootbotics.
the clearing from which you are recovering
the relic. If you rule fewer of these clearings A.4 Step 4: Seat Players
than the relic’s value, then you must end this Determine the seating order and the first player randomly.
A.5 Step 5: Set up Landmarks Q
As a group, you may choose to use landmarks (Appen-
dix F). If so, you may ignore or override the placement
of the Tower and Ferry pieces described in Variant Maps
(Appendix C).
A.5.1 Step 1: Choose. As a group, choose if you’re play-
ing with one or two landmarks, and remove any
landmark cards you do not want to play with.
A.5.2 Step 2: Deal and Collect. Shuffle the chosen land-
mark cards, deal out the chosen number, and col-
lect the landmark piece shown on each dealt card.
17

A.5.3 Step 3: Set Up. The last player in turn order sets III Vagabond. Whenever a Vagabond faction set-
up one drawn landmark as described on its card. up card is dealt out, also deal out one random
If you chose to play with two landmarks, the sec- character card next to it face up. If a player
ond-to-last player in turn order sets up the other chooses this Vagabond as their faction, they
drawn landmark as described on its card. must use this character card.
A.6 Step 6: Set up Hirelings ZK A.8.2 Step 2: Choose Factions. Starting with the last
player in turn order and going counterclockwise,
As a group, you may choose to use exactly three hire-
each player chooses one faction setup card from
lings (Appendix E), as follows.
the pool and sets up the faction immediately as it
A.6.1 Step 1: Collect Pieces. Shuffle all the hirelings describes (before another player chooses).
cards. Deal out three hireling cards and return
I Homelands. When setting up, players might
the rest to the box. Collect the pieces for the dealt
choose one or more homeland clearings. Play-
hireling cards into a supply.
ers cannot choose homelands that enemies
A.6.2 Step 2: Demote. If playing with three players, have chosen as their homelands or where they
flip over one random hireling to its Demoted side cannot place all the pieces listed in setup.
(marked with a “D”). If playing with four players,
II Enemy Homeland Adjacency. Some factions
flip over two random hirelings to their Demoted
require you to choose a homeland that is not
side. If playing with five or more players, flip over
adjacent to enemy homelands; if you cannot
all three hirelings to their Demoted side.
do this, choose a homeland adjacent to an ene-
A.6.3 Step 3: Set Up Hirelings. Starting with the last my homeland. If you must choose a homeland
player in turn order and going counterclockwise, that has two or more clearings between it and
players set up one dealt hireling each as described enemy homelands but you cannot, choose a
on its hireling card. (Some have no setup instructions.) homeland that is not adjacent to enemy home-
A.6.4 Step 4: Place Hireling Markers. Place the three lands. (Basically, try to set up as far away as able.)
hireling markers—marked “4,” “8,” and “12”—on III Multiple Homeland Adjacency. If your faction
the “4,” “8,” and “12” spaces of the score track on has multiple homelands and you cannot ful-
the map. fill all of their enemy adjacency requirements
A.6.5 Step 5: Return Corresponding Factions. A fac- (A.8.2.II), choose and set them up one at a time,
tion cannot be played if its corresponding hire- fulfilling each requirement as best you can.
ling is in play (shown by color and icon). Return the
A.9 Step 9: Place Score Markers
corresponding faction boards, pieces, and setup
cards to the box. Each player places their faction’s score marker on the
“0” space on the score track.
A.7 Step 7: Draw Five Cards
A.10 Step 10: Choose Starting Hands
If you are playing with two players, remove all four
dominance cards from the deck. Shuffle the deck. Each Each player chooses three cards in their hand to keep
player draws five cards. (Not three, as in Standard Setup! and puts the other two cards face down on the shared
You will choose three cards to keep in step 10.) deck. When finished, shuffle the shared deck.
A.8 Step 8: Set Up Factions Z B. Components
As a group, you may choose and set up factions as de-
scribed in the Standard Setup (5.1) or you may use the B.1 Root
faction setup cards included in the Marauder Expan-
B.1.1 Booklets. Walkthrough, Learning to Play, and
sion, as described below.
this Law.
A.8.1 Step 1: Deal Setup Cards. Shuffle all of the mili- B.1.2 Cardboard Pieces. 28 Buildings (7 Roosts, 6 Saw-
tant faction setup cards (red name with sword) and
mills, 6 Recruiters, 6 Workshops, 3 Bases), 19 Tokens
deal out one card to a pool in the center of the
(10 Sympathy, 8 Wood, 1 Keep), 12 Clearing Mark-
table. Shuffle the remaining militant faction set-
ers (4 Rabbit, 4 Fox, 4 Mouse), 4 Ruins, 4 Victory
up cards together with all of the insurgent faction
Point Markers, 3 Relationship Markers, 23 Items
setup cards (grey name with no sword), and deal out
(4 Boots, 4 Swords, 4 Bags, 3 Hammers, 3 Tea, 2 Coins,
one faction setup card per player. (There will be one
2 Crossbows, 1 Torch).
more faction setup card than the number of players.)
B.1.3 Wooden Pieces. 55 Warriors (25 Marquise, 20 Ey-
I Two Players. If you’re playing with two players, rie, 10 Alliance), 1 Vagabond Pawn.
remove all of the insurgent faction setup cards
before dealing out any. (You may keep them if you’re B.1.4 Cards. 54 Cards for Shared Deck, 16 Faction
Overviews, 4 Eyrie Leaders, 2 Loyal Viziers, 3 Vag-
playing with hirelings and feeling adventurous.)
abond Characters, 15 Quests, 4 Walkthroughs.
II Lock Last Insurgent. If the last faction setup
card dealt out is an insurgent, turn it sideways to B.1.5 Other. Board (Fall and Winter Maps), 2 Dice, 4 Fac-
tion Boards (Marquise, Eyrie, Alliance, Vagabond).
show that it is locked. It cannot be chosen unless
18 at least one militant faction has been chosen.

B.2 Riverfolk Expansion X B.7 Exiles and Partisans Deck P
B.2.1 Booklets. Learning to Play. B.7.1 Cards. 54 Cards for Shared Deck.
B.2.2 Cardboard Pieces. 15 Buildings (15 Gardens), B.8 Landmarks Pack Q
9 Tokens (9 Trade Posts), 3 Victory Point Mark-
ers, 1 Outcast Marker, 9 Relationship Markers, B.8.1 Cards. 1 Setup/Rules, 6 Landmarks.
11 Items (3 Boots, 3 Swords, 1 Bag, 1 Hammer, B.8.2 Wooden Pieces. 4 Landmarks.
1 Torch, 1 Coins, 1 Crossbow), and 17 spare pieces B.9 Vagabond Pack B
with letter backs for future scenarios.
B.2.3 Wooden Pieces. 40 Warriors (25 Lizard, 15 River- B.9.1 Cardboard Pieces. 3 Items (1 Coins, 1 Hammer,
1 Boot)
folk), 1 Vagabond Pawn.
B.9.2 Wooden Pieces. 7 Vagabond Pawns.
B.2.4 Cards. 4 Spies, 2 Faction Overviews, 3 Vaga-
bond Characters. B.9.3 Cards. 3 Vagabond Characters.
B.2.5 Other. 4 Faction Boards (Second Vagabond, Me- B.10 Hireling Packs K
chanical Marquise, Riverfolk Company, Lizard Cult),
B.10.1 Booklets. Learning to Play Hirelings.
3 Service Markers, 1 Card Stand.
B.10.2 Cardboard Pieces. 3 Hireling Markers, 12 Con-
B.3 Underworld Expansion L trol Markers. 3 Foothold Tokens in Underworld
Pack. 6 Vault Buildings in Marauder Pack.
B.3.1 Booklets. Learning to Play and this Law.
B.3.2 Cardboard Pieces. 6 Buildings (3 Markets, 3 Cit- B.10.3 Wooden Pieces. 1 Flotilla Pawn, 4 Prophet War-
adels), 19 Tokens (8 Plots, 8 Spare Plots, 3 Tunnels), riors, 4 Bandit Warriors in Riverfolk Pack. 8 Ex-
pedition Warriors, 6 Spy Warriors, and 1 Protec-
the Burrow, 4 Relationship Markers, 2 Victory
tor Pawn in Underworld Pack. 6 Bearer Warriors,
Point Markers, 6 Closed Path Markers.
6 Keeper Warriors, and 5 Band Warriors in Ma-
B.3.3 Wooden Pieces. 35 Warriors (20 Duchy, 15 Corvid),
rauder Pack.
1 Ferry, 1 Tower, 9 Crowns.
B.10.4 Cards. 3 Hirelings.
B.3.4 Cards. 9 Ministers, 2 Overviews.
B.3.5 Other. Board (Lake and Mountain Maps), 2 Dice, B.10.5 Other. 1 Control Die.
2 Faction Boards (Duchy, Corvid).
C. Variant Maps
B.4 Marauder Expansion Z
C.1 Winter Map
B.4.1 Booklets. Learning to Play and this Law.
B.4.2 Cardboard Pieces. 9 Buildings (3 Waystations, C.1.1 Raging River. The river divides forests (as printed
6 Strongholds), 17 Tokens (12 Relics, 5 Mobs), 4 Rela- paths do).
tionship Markers, 2 Victory Point Markers, 12 Con- C.2 Lake Map L
trol Markers, 3 Club Items, 3 Hireling Markers, 11
Extra Markers (9 Victory Points, 2 Relationships). C.2.1 Setup Modifications. Place the Ferry piece in the
corner clearing that is also a coastal clearing.
B.4.3 Wooden Pieces. 56 Warriors (20 Hundreds,
15 Keepers, 12 Patrol, 5 Dynasty, 4 Uprising), 1 Hun- C.2.2 The Lake. The lake is in the center of the map.
The lake is treated as rivers linking each coastal
dreds Warlord, 1 Exile Pawn.
clearing to each other coastal clearing. The lake
B.4.4 Cards. 8 Moods, 3 Faithful Retainers, 10 Faction
divides forests.
Setup, 4 Hirelings, 2 Overviews.
C.2.3 Coastal Clearings. Clearings touching the lake
B.4.5 Other. 2 Faction Boards (Hundreds, Keepers), (not separated by a forest) are coastal clearings.
3 Dice (Mob, Uprising, Control).
C.2.4 Coastal Forests. Forests touching the lake are
B.5 Clockwork Expansion C coastal forests. Each coastal forest is adjacent to
B.5.1 Booklets. Law of Rootbotics. its two neighboring coastal forests (separated by one
coastal clearing).
B.5.2 Cardboard Pieces. 12 Priority Markers.
B.5.3 Cards. 12 Difficulties, 16 Traits, 3 Vagabots. C.2.5 The Ferry. Once per turn, pieces moving from the
coastal clearing with the Ferry can move on the
B.5.4 Other. 4 Faction Boards. lake to any other coastal clearing, ignoring ad-
B.6 Clockwork Expansion 2 C jacency, and moving the Ferry along with them.
(You still must rule the origin or destination clearing.)
B.6.1 Booklets. Law of Rootbotics.
After this, the moving player draws one card. The
B.6.2 Cardboard Pieces. 12 Priority Markers. Ferry cannot be battled or removed.
B.6.3 Cards. 12 Difficulties, 20 Traits, 3 Vagabots, 1 In-
teraction, 11 Services.
B.6.4 Other. 4 Faction Boards.
19

C.3 Mountain Map L the clearing of battle. The Arbiter scores one vic-
tory point and adds all of his undamaged S to the
C.3.1 Setup Modifications. Place the 6 closed path
maximum rolled hits of the defender. The Arbiter
markers to cover the 6 paths of darker color with
cannot enlist himself or be enlisted against himself.
excavated ground. Place the Tower piece in the
central clearing showing two towers. D.6 Scoundrel X
C.3.2 Closed Paths. A path covered with a closed path D.6.1 Starting Items. Start with M, M, F, C.
marker is a closed path. Clearings linked by a
D.6.2 Special Action: Scorched Earth. Exhaust a F
closed path are not adjacent, and pieces (such
and place it in your clearing. Remove all enemy
as Highway Bandits) cannot be placed on closed
pieces from that clearing. Pieces cannot be placed
paths. Closed paths enclose and divide forests as
in or moved into the clearing with the F. (You re-
if they were paths (so the Vagabond can slip across it).
main in this clearing. Once you move out, you cannot
C.3.3 Removing Closed Paths. Once per turn in their move back in. The F cannot be removed with a “Favor
Daylight, a player can spend a card to remove a of the...” card because it is not an enemy piece.)
closed path marker from the game permanently
D.7 Adventurer B
and score one victory point. To remove it, that
player must have any faction pieces in either clear- D.7.1 Starting Items. Start with M, F, H.
ing linked by the closed path marker.
D.7.2 Special Action: Improvise. Once per turn while
C.3.4 The Pass and Tower. The clearing marked with the taking the Quest action, you may treat one unex-
Tower piece is the Pass. At the end of a player’s hausted item as any other item. When you exhaust
Evening, if that player rules the Pass, that player it to complete the quest, also damage that item.
scores one victory point.
D.8 Ronin B
C.3.5 Forests. All areas on the mountain map enclosed
by paths and clearings are forests (2.2), regardless D.8.1 Starting Items. Start with M, M F, S.
of the presence or placement of trees within. D.8.2 Special Action: Swift Strike. You may exhaust a
S to deal an extra hit in battle (after rolling).
D. Vagabonds D.9 Harrier B
D.1 Thief D.9.1 Starting Items. Start with X, F, S, C.
D.1.1 Starting Items. Start with M, F, T, S. D.9.2 Special Action: Glide. Exhaust a F to move
only your Vagabond pawn (not other pieces) to any
D.1.2 Special Action: Steal. Exhaust one F to take a clearing (even Hostile) on the map, ignoring adja-
random card from any player in your clearing. cency and paths, without exhausting any M.
D.2 Tinker
E. Hirelings
D.2.1 Starting Items. Start with M, F, B, H.
D.2.2 Special Action: Day Labor. Exhaust one F to E.1 Gaining and Losing Hirelings
take a card from the discard pile whose suit match-
es your clearing. (You can always take a bird card.) E.1.1 Gaining from Supply. When a player’s score
marker enters a space with a hireling marker, they
D.3 Ranger take the hireling marker and place it below their
D.3.1 Starting Items. Start with M, F, C, S. Evening (as a reminder). At the end of their turn,
they take any hireling card from the supply, roll
D.3.2 Special Action: Hideout. Exhaust one F to re-
for control (1.2), and flip over the hireling marker.
pair three items. Then, immediately end Daylight
and begin Evening. E.1.2 Rolling for Control. When a player gains a hire-
ling card, they roll the control die and place con-
D.4 Vagrant X
D.4.1 Starting Items. Start with X, F, M.
D.4.2 Special Action: Instigate. Exhaust a F to initiate
a battle in your clearing. You choose the attacker
and defender, you choose the order in which they
each remove their own buildings and tokens, and
you remove pieces for each. (Score a victory point
per building or token of either player removed, and per
Hostile piece of either player removed.)
D.5 Arbiter X
D.5.1 Starting Items. Start with M, F, S, S.
D.5.2 Special Action: Protector. Before dice are rolled
in a battle, the defender may enlist the Arbiter in
20

trol markers on the hireling card equal in number ers can still score points by removing hireling buildings
to the die roll. They count only the gold die pips and tokens, even when defending in battle against the
if they have the most victory points or are tied for hireling. Players still score as normal if the Warm Sun
the most; they count all the die pips otherwise (in- Prophets force that player’s faction pieces to battle.)
cluding if they have activated a dominance card).
E.3.7 Weird Stuff. If you move a hireling with the Ferry,
E.1.3 Gaining from Another Player. At the end of a you do draw a card. If you move hireling warriors
player’s turn, they must remove one control mark- into a clearing with an Alliance sympathy token
er from each hireling card they gained on previ- or remove Alliance sympathy by using a hireling,
ous turns. Then, they must give each hireling card this does trigger Outrage. (These effects refer to a
they control that has no control markers, along “player moving” or “player removing.”)
with a hireling marker, to any other player (even
the player with the highest score). That player puts the F. Landmarks
hireling marker below their Evening (as a remind-
er) and immediately rolls for control (1.2). F.1 General Rules
E.2 Abilities and Actions F.1.1 Safety. Landmarks cannot be battled, moved, or
removed, unless noted explicitly by a landmark.
Hirelings have various actions and abilities, as shown
by unique icons. Actions and abilities that start with F.1.2 Ownership. Landmarks are not owned by any fac-
“Controller:” are gained by the hireling’s controller. tion and are not enemy pieces.
E.2.1 When-Hired Action ( ). When they take con-
G. Glossary
trol of the hireling, the controlling player must
take this action.
G.1.1 Ability. A persistent effect of a faction as listed
E.2.2 Ability ( ). This ability is always active or it at the top of its faction board and in its Faction
specifies when it happens. Rules and Abilities section, or a persistent effect
E.2.3 Start-of-Birdsong Action ( ). At the start of of a hireling as listed on its hireling card (E.2.1).
their Birdsong, the controlling player must or G.1.2 Adjacent. A clearing is adjacent to all other clear-
may take this action, as the action describes. ings linked to it by a path. A forest is adjacent to
E.2.4 Once-Per-Daylight Action ( ). Once in all clearings that touch it without crossing a path,
their Daylight, the controlling player may take and it is adjacent to all forests that are separated
this action. by only one path, except on the lake (C.2.4). D
E.3 Rules G.1.3 Building. A square cardboard piece owned by its
faction.
E.3.1 Rule. A hireling’s controller treats hireling pieces
as their own only for rule. (The controller can rule a G.1.4 Cannot. See 1.1.2.
clearing even with hirelings alone.) Uncontrolled hire- G.1.5 Discard. Place the prompted card in the shared
discard pile (2.1). If it is a dominance card, place
lings can rule clearings as if they were players (2.5).
it near the map instead (3.3.3). L
E.3.2 Enemy Status. A hireling is an enemy to players
other than its controller and players in coalition G.1.6 Draw. Take the top card from the shared deck (2.1).
with its controller. G.1.7 Effect. Anything that changes the game, includ-
ing persistent effects, faction abilities, and actions.
E.3.3 Separate Pieces. Hireling pieces are not the con-
troller’s faction pieces. (So, the Duchy cannot count G.1.8 Enemy. Any other player that you are not in a co-
them as Duchy pieces to sway, the Keepers cannot re- alition with (9.2.8), or a hireling that is in the sup-
move them to encamp, etc.). ply or held by an enemy player.
E.3.4 Separate Actions. A hireling’s Move or Battle ac- G.1.9 Enemy Piece. A faction piece of an enemy player
tions can only move or battle with the hireling’s or a hireling piece of an enemy hireling, except
pieces and cannot include the controller’s pieces. while you’re treating the piece as your own for
Hirelings cannot take actions in other ways (such rule (Riverfolk mercenaries, controlled hirelings, etc.).
as from their controller’s Move actions, False Orders, or (Items cannot be enemy pieces.)
the Vagabond’s Allied Relationship). G.1.10 Faction Piece. All the warriors, pawns, buildings,
E.3.5 Separate Effects. Hirelings cannot use their con- and tokens listed on the back of a faction board.
troller’s abilities, crafted persistent effects, or am- (Items are not faction pieces.) See 1.5.2.
bush cards. (So, a hireling could not use Boat Builders G.1.11 Forest. An area on the map enclosed by paths and
while moving, and the Highway Bandits could not be clearings.
placed on a river. A hireling’s controller could not play
G.1.12 Force. See 1.5.5.
an ambush card while battling with the hireling.)
G.1.13 Item. A square cardboard piece showing an item
E.3.6 No Scoring from Removal. A hireling’s control- (M, S, C, etc.) that is not owned by any faction.
ler does not score victory points if their hireling
removes an enemy piece (usually in battle). (Play- G.1.14 Map. See 2.2.
21

G.1.15 Map Edge. The single closed loop of clearings
and paths that define the map boundary, includ-
ing closed paths on the mountain map.
G.1.16 Path. A white link between two clearings.
G.1.17 Pawn. A wooden figure owned by its faction.
G.1.18 Piece. Any component—building, token, warrior,
pawn, item, marker, and so on.
G.1.19 Place. Take the prompted piece from the prompt-
ed source and put it in the prompted destination.
Usually, no source is specified—in this case, take
it from its supply, or take the leftmost prompted
piece if it is on a track. Put is shorthand for Place.
G.1.20 Play Area. The area around your faction board.
Cards in it can only be spent, discarded, or used
for other purposes if explicitly instructed.
G.1.21 Replace. Shorthand for remove then place. Re-
move the prompted piece and place the other
prompted piece in location from which the first
was removed. You must complete all steps of the
replace in order to do it.
G.1.22 Remove. Take the prompted piece from the
prompted source and return it to the prompted
destination. Usually, no destination is specified—
in this case, return it to its owner’s supply, return
it to the rightmost empty space of its track it has
one, or remove it permanently otherwise. (Items
are removed permanently.)
G.1.23 Reveal. Place the prompted card face up in your
play area. Usually, no source is specified—in this
case, take it from your hand.
G.1.24 River. A blue link between two clearings.
G.1.25 Ruin. Piece covering an “R” slot in a clearing (2.2.4).
G.1.26 Rule. See 2.5.
G.1.27 Show. Let the prompted player see the prompt-
ed piece.
G.1.28 Slot. White box in a clearing (2.2.3).
G.1.29 Spend. See Discard. (These terms are equivalent,
but spend is used in contexts with choice.)
G.1.30 Supply. The collection of pieces that is not on a
faction board or the map. The item supply is the
collection of items on the map.
G.1.31 Swap. Switch the locations of the two prompted
pieces. (This ignores move and place restrictions, such
as the Corvids’ snare and the Marquise’s keep.)
G.1.32 Token. A circular cardboard piece owned by its
faction.
G.1.33 Treat. The prompted thing takes on the proper-
ties of the second prompted thing. While you treat
enemy pieces as your own for rule, they are not
enemy pieces, but they are still faction pieces of
that enemy player. (For example, Riverfolk warriors
you’ve hired as mercenaries are not enemy pieces to
you, but they are still Riverfolk faction pieces.)
G.1.34 Warrior. A wooden figure owned by its faction.
(The Vagabond pawn is not a warrior and cannot
be removed.)
22

INDEX
Ambush cards, 2.1.2
in battle, 4.3.1
Battle, 4.3
ambushing in, 4.3.1
defenseless rule for, 4.3.3.II
ending early, 4.3.1.II
Bots, A.3
Cards
ambush, 2.1.2
birds are wild rule of, 2.1.1
dominance, 2.1.3
drawing and discarding, 2.1
giving to other players, 1.3.2
suits of, 2.1
Clearings
adjacency of, 2.2.1
homeland, A.8.2.I–II
on lake map, C.2.3
slots in, 2.2.3
suits of, 2.2.2
ruins in, 2.2.4
Craft, 4.1
cost of, 4.1.1
scoring points with, 3.2.2
three-color question marks in, 4.1.1
Decks, A.2
Defenseless rule, 4.3.3.II
Dominance cards, 2.1.3
activating, 3.3.1
discarding and spending, 3.3.3
hand limit and, 3.3.2
taking available, 3.3.4
winning with, 3.3.1.I–II
Faction
drafting in advanced setup, A.8
pieces, 1.5.2
standard setup, 5.1.1, 5.1.7
Ferry piece, C.2.5
Forests, 2.4
on lake map, C.2.4
on mountain map, C.3.5
Glossary, Appendix G

Hirelings
rules for, Appendix E
setup for, A.6
Hits
dealing, 4.3.4
defenseless rule for, 4.3.3.II
extra, 4.3.3.I
maximum rolled, 4.3.2.I
rolling, 4.3.2
taking, 4.3.4
Homelands, A.8.2.I–II
Information, 1.2
Lake, C.2.2
Landmarks
rules for, Appendix F
setup for, A.5
Maps
rules for, Appendix C
setup for, A.1
Move, 4.2
rule is needed for, 4.2.1
same piece multiple times, 4.2.2
using the Ferry, C.2.5
Negotiation, 2.1
Pass, The, C.3.4
Paths, 2.2
on mountain map, C.3.2–C.3.3
Persistent effects, 4.1.3
no duplicates of, 4.1.4

Pieces
limits of, 1.5.1
list of, Appendix B
manipulating, 1.5.4
ownership of, 1.5.3
Reach, 5.2
Rivers, 2.3
on lake map, C.2
on winter map, C.1
Rule, 2.5
no rule on tie, 2.5
Rules conflicts, 1.1
Setup
advanced, Appendix A
standard, 5.1
Scoring
by crafting, 3.2.2
by removing enemy buildings and tokens, 3.2.1
Terminology, Appendix G
Timing
game structure and, 1.4.1
interrupts and, 1.4.2
simultaneous things and, 1.1.3
Tower piece, C.3.4
Winning
by dominance, 3.3
by victory points, 3.1
simultaneously, 3.1
23

Cole dedicates this game to his younger brothers and
sisters, who never let him forget how to play.
Kyle dedicates this game to his children, who have
always requested cute animal drawings.
Credits
ROOT & RIVERFOLK
Cole Wehrle (lead design, devel-
opment, co-lead graphic design),
Kyle Ferrin (illustration, co-lead
graphic design), Patrick Leder
(concept, development), Joshua
Yearsley (editing, development),
Nick Brachmann (development, graphic design), Clayton
Capra (development), Jake Tonding (development), Jaime
Willems (graphic design), Kate Unrau (proofreading)
UNDERWORLD
Patrick Leder (lead design), Kyle Ferrin (illustration), Nick
Brachmann (lead development, lead graphic design), Cole
Wehrle (development, graphic design), Joshua Yearsley (edit-
ing, development), Kate Unrau (proofreading)
MARAUDER
Patrick Leder (co-lead design), Cole Wehrle (co-lead design),
Kyle Ferrin (illustration), Nick Brachmann (lead development,
design, graphic design), Pati Hyun (lead graphic design, pre-
press), Joshua Yearsley (design, development, editing), Rachel
Lapidow (proofreading), Kate Unrau (proofreading)
STAFF AT PRINTING
Patrick Leder, Kyle Ferrin, Caryl Tan, Cole Wehrle,
Nick Brachmann, Clayton Capra, Pati Hyun, Brooke Nelson,
Joshua Yearsley, Ted Caya, Claire Donaghue, Andrea
Francisco, Anne Kinner
PLAYTESTING
Grayson Page and his amazing group (inc. Martin, Jared, Rich-
ard, Tony, Harvey), Chas Threlkeld, Drew Wehrle, Blake Wehr-
le, Corey Porter, Kyle Kirk, Matthew Root, Mark von Minden,
Davey Janik-Jones, the stalwart players of First Minnesota, Jim
Bolland, Melissa Lewis-Gentry and Modern Myths, Jennifer
Gutterman and Hampshire College, Matthew Snow, Justin
Dowd and the Brass Cat, the Owl & Raven crew, Josh Hous-
er, Brian Peterson, Ethan Zimmerman, Brandi Leder, Heath-
er Brian, Ted Scamp, Jenny and Matt Benusa, Andrew Olson,
Joel McGuire, Nathaniel Hicklin, Jacob Resler, Rae Kawalek,
Nick Sopkowiak, Aaron Greatorex-Voith, Nicole Szajner, and
the Brooklyn Game Lab (Robert Hewitt, Jack DeWald, Joseph
Esbenshade, Nahvid Etedali, David Kanof, Marceline Leiman,
Jill Pullara), Dāvis Dālmanis, Luke Bridwell, Justin Keenan,
Bryan Vogel, Nick “Nev” Burton, Doug Radcliffe, Jeremy Li-
les, Kovács Botond, Mark Overstreet, Hung Nguyen, Luke
McNally, Joshua Clark Orkin, Guerric Samples, Hunter C
Fyffe, Steve Owen, Jon Mott, Sam De Roest, Sarah Shirley, Mi-
chela Garber, Patrick Flores Velarde, Lili Chin, Christina Berk-
ley, Sebastian Apel, Opie’s Funeral, and many others
Need a replacement part?
ledergames.com/replacements
Learn more about Root:
ledergames.com/root
24

Key References
Craft (4.1)
Play a card and activate the crafting pieces of the suits
listed in its bottom-left corner. (Vagabond exhausts H.)
The suit of a crafting piece matches its clearing, and
you can activate each crafting piece only once per turn.
If you craft an immediate effect, resolve it and discard
the card. Often these effects will let you take an item
from the supply on the map and score victory points.
If the item supply on the map does not have the listed
item to take, you cannot craft the card.
If you craft a persistent effect, place the card in your
play area. You may use its effect. You cannot craft a per-
sistent effect if you have one of the same name.
Move (4.2)
Take any of your warriors and pawns from one clearing
and move them to one adjacent clearing.
You must rule the origin, destination, or both. A given
piece can be moved any number of times per turn.
Battle (4.3)
You can battle in a clearing with your warriors or pawn.
Step 1: Defender May Ambush. Attacker may cancel
defender’s ambush card by also playing ambush card.
Step 2: Roll Dice. Attacker will deal hits equal to higher
roll. Defender will deal hits equal to lower roll.
The maximum hits you can deal by rolling equals your
number of warriors in the clearing of battle.
Step 3: Use Effects. The players may use optional effects
that affect battle now. Many deal extra hits, which are
not limited by warriors.
Defenseless: If the defender has no warriors in the clear-
ing of battle, the attacker deals an extra hit.
Step 4: Deal Hits. Each hit removes one piece—
warriors first, then buildings and tokens, as chosen by
the player taking the hits.
Remember: Score a victory point each time
you remove an enemy building or token.
Setup (5.1)
Step 1: Assign factions, then determine starting player
and seating order randomly. Give board and pieces.
Step 2: Place score markers on the “0” space.
Step 3: Draw and give three cards to each player.
Step 4: Place ruins in the four slots marked with “R.”
Step 5: Form item supply near the top of the map.
Step 6: Gather dice and overview cards if desired.
Step 7: Set up factions in setup order (A, B, C, etc.).